Journal of Educational Psychology
2015, Vol. 107, No. 1, 64 –78

0022-0663/15/$12.00

© 2014 American Psychological Association
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0037478

Matching Learning Style to Instructional Method:
Effects on Comprehension

Beth A. Rogowsky
Bloomsburg University of Pennsylvania

Barbara M. Calhoun
Vanderbilt University

Paula Tallal
Rutgers University and University of California,
San Diego

While it is hypothesized that providing instruction based on individuals’ preferred learning styles
improves learning (i.e., reading for visual learners and listening for auditory learners, also referred to as
the meshing hypothesis), after a critical review of the literature Pashler, McDaniel, Rohrer, and Bjork
(2008) concluded that this hypothesis lacks empirical evidence and subsequently described the experi-
mental design needed to evaluate the meshing hypothesis. Following the design of Pashler et al., we
empirically investigated the effect of learning style preference with college-educated adults, specifically
as applied to (a) verbal comprehension aptitude (listening or reading) and (b) learning based on mode of
instruction (digital audiobook or e-text). First, participants’ auditory and visual learning style preferences
were established based on a standardized adult learning style inventory. Participants were then given a
verbal comprehension aptitude test in both oral and written forms. Results failed to show a statistically
significant relationship between learning style preference (auditory, visual word) and learning aptitude
(listening comprehension, reading comprehension). Second, participants were randomly assigned to 1 of
2 groups that received the same instructional material from a nonfiction book, but each in a different
instructional mode (digital audiobook, e-text), and then completed a written comprehension test imme-
diately and after 2 weeks. Results demonstrated no statistically significant relationship between learning
style preference (auditory, visual word) and instructional method (audiobook, e-text) for either immediate
or delayed comprehension tests. Taken together, the results of our investigation failed to statistically
support the meshing hypothesis either for verbal comprehension aptitude or learning based on mode of
instruction (digital audiobook, e-text).

Keywords: learning styles, listening and reading comprehension, audiobooks, e-text

Teaching to individuals’ perceived learning styles in hopes that
they will achieve greater academic success is common practice
within the field of education. Not only does the learning styles
concept have widespread acceptance among educators (Dekker,
Lee, Howard-Jones, & Jolles, 2012) but also it is accepted among
the general public (Pashler, McDaniel, Rohrer, & Bjork, 2008).

This article was published Online First July 28, 2014.
Beth A. Rogowsky, College of Education, Bloomsburg University of
Pennsylvania; Barbara M. Calhoun, Vanderbilt Brain Institute, Vanderbilt
University; Paula Tallal, Center for Molecular and Behavioral Neurosci-
ence, Rutgers University, and Center for Human Development, University
of California, San Diego.

We are grateful to Audible, Inc., who provided the digital audiobook and
e-text materials used in this study. We are also grateful to Susan Rundle
who provided the Building Excellence Learning Style Inventory gratis.
Additionally, we would like to thank the Temporal Dynamics of Learning
Center, a National Science Foundation (NSF) Science of Learning Center
funded by NSF Grant SBE– 0542013.

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Beth A. Ro-
gowsky, College of Education, 2213 McCormick Center, Bloomsburg University
of Pennsylvania, Bloomsburg, PA 17815. E-mail: brogowsk@bloomu.edu or
brogowsky@gmail.com

64

The learning style literature, as well as learning style inventories,
differs widely in the way that learning styles are conceived and
assessed (see Coffield, Moseley, Hall, & Ecclestone, 2004, and
Pashler et al., 2008, for review). For example, in the Gregorc Style
Delineator (Gregorc, 1982), learning styles are defined by percep-
tion (concrete or abstract) and ordering (sequential or random).
The Kolb’s Learning Style Inventory (1985) emphasizes experi-
ential learning and includes accommodating, diverging, con-
verging, and assimilating styles. Herrmann’s Brain Dominance
Instrument (1996) categorizes learners as theorists (cerebral,
left: the rational self), organizers (limbic, left: the safe-keeping
self), innovators (cerebral, right: the experimental self), and
humanitarians (limbic, right: the feeling self). Dunn and Dunn’s
Learning Styles Inventory (Dunn, Dunn, & Price, 1989) con-
centrates on modality-specific strengths and weaknesses (e.g.,
tactile, and kinesthetic processing). In the
visual, auditory,
current study, we focused on verbal comprehension, specifi-
cally, the extent to which verbal comprehension may be influ-
enced by the modality of input: auditory (digital audio) or
visual (e-text).

While the learning styles literature has been extensively dis-
cussed and reviewed, there are considerably more theoretical and
descriptive discussions on this topic than there are empirical stud-

MATCHING LEARNING STYLE TO INSTRUCTIONAL CONDITION

65

ies. For example, Cassidy (2004) described the central themes and
issues surrounding learning styles and the many instruments avail-
able for the measurement of learning styles with the goal of
promoting research in the field. Kozhevnikov (2007) presented a
literature review on cognitive styles, which served as a basis for
the author’s theory that suggests that cognitive styles represent
heuristics that can be identified at multiple levels of information
processing, from perceptual to metacognitive, and that individ-
uals can be grouped according to the type of regulatory function
they exert. Sternberg, Grigorenko, and Zhang (2008) divided
learning and thinking into two basic styles: ability based and
personality based, and advocated that both are important for
instruction and assessment. They argued that teachers need to
take into consideration differences in how students learn and
think and design instruction accordingly to obtain optimal in-
structional outcomes.

The importance of evaluating students’ learning styles and de-
veloping instructional methods that
teach to specific learning
styles has gained considerable support in the field of education,
with many organizations and companies offering professional de-
velopment courses for teachers and educators focused on the topic
of learning styles. For this reason, Pashler, McDaniel, Rohrer, and
Bjork (2008) were charged with reviewing the empirical evidence
pertaining to the importance of assessing and teaching to students’
learning styles for the journal Psychological Science in the Public
Interest. In their review, they define learning styles as “the concept
that individuals differ in regard to what mode of instruction or
study is most effective for them. . . . Themost common— but not
the only— hypothesis about the instructional relevance of learning
styles is the meshing hypothesis, according to which instruction is
best provided in a format that matches the preferences of the
learner (e.g., for a ‘visual learner,’ emphasizing visual presentation
of information; p. 105).” After reviewing the literature, they found
that while there is evidence that, if asked, both children and adults
indicate preferences as to how they favor information be presented
to them, and there is also evidence that people have specific
aptitudes for processing different types of instruction, there is
limited empirical evidence as to whether providing instruction in
an individual’s preferred learning style (i.e., listening for those
with an auditory learning style or reading for those with a visual
learning style) improves learning. Furthermore, they also con-
cluded that the definitive study showing that individuals with a
preferred auditory learning style learn better when listening rather
than reading, and conversely, that those with a preferred visual
learning style learn better when reading rather than listening, had
not been conducted.

Given the lack of credible validation of learning-styles-based
instruction, Pashler et al. (2008) described a three-step experimen-
tal design of the study that would need to be conducted, as well as
the pattern of data that would need to be found, in order to
conclude empirically that learning is significantly improved when
individuals receive instruction tailored to their asserted learning
style. In Step 1, participants must be divided into groups on the
basis of their learning style. In Step 2, participants from each group
must be randomly assigned to receive one of multiple instructional
methods. In Step 3, participants must complete an assessment of
the material that is the same for all students. For the learning styles
meshing hypothesis to be supported, data analysis must reveal a
specific type of interaction between learning style and instructional

method. That is, learning is optimal when individuals receive
instruction in their preferred learning style, and the instructional
method that proves most effective for individuals with one learn-
ing style is not the most effective method for individuals with a
different learning style.

Pashler et al. (2008) also pointed out that educators as well as
the general public fail to distinguish between learning style pref-
erences and learning aptitude. They stated that“[t]here is, after all,
a commonsense reason why the two concepts could be con-
flated: Namely, different modes of instruction might be optimal
for different people because different modes of presentation
exploit the specific perceptual and cognitive strengths of dif-
ferent individuals, as suggested by the meshing hypothesis”
(pp. 109 –110). However,
the relationship between learning
style preference and learning aptitude, specifically as it relates
to the meshing hypothesis and verbal comprehension, has not
been established empirically.

In 2012, Dekker, Lee, Howard-Jones, and Jolles reported that
94% of educators believed that students perform better when they
receive information in their preferred learning style (e.g., auditory,
visual, kinesthetic). Given this continued widespread belief and the
influence of learning styles on educational practice, coupled with
the importance of verbal comprehension on educational outcomes,
we conducted an investigation of the meshing hypothesis as it
pertains to verbal aptitude and learning. We implemented the
methodology and analyses proposed by Pashler et al. (2008) in
order to directly test the following two research questions:

1. What is the extent to which learning style preferences (audi-
tory, visual) equate to learning aptitudes (listening comprehension,
reading comprehension)?

2. What is the extent to which learning style preferences and/or
learning aptitudes predict how much an individual comprehends
and retains based on mode of instruction (audiobook, e-text)?

In the first research question, we investigated the relationship
between learning style preferences (as measured by a standardized
learning style inventory) and learning aptitudes (as measured by a
listening and reading comprehension assessment). Specifically, as
applied to the relationship between verbal aptitude and learning
style preference, the meshing hypothesis predicts that (a) there will
be a positive correlation between auditory learning style prefer-
ence and listening comprehension, (b) there will be a positive
correlation between visual word learning style preference and
reading comprehension, and (c) individuals with a visual learning
style preference will comprehend better when they read rather than
listen, and conversely, individuals with an auditory learning style
preference will comprehend better when they listen rather than
read.

In the second research question, we investigated the extent to
which learning style preferences (auditory, visual) and/or learning
aptitudes (listening comprehension, reading comprehension) pre-
dict how much an individual will learn and retain based on two
different modes of instruction (audiobook, e-text). Specifically, the
meshing hypothesis predicts that individuals with a visual learning
style preference learn more when they read e-text rather than when
they listen to an audiobook, and conversely, individuals with an
auditory learning style preference learn more when they listen to
an audiobook rather than read e-text. Analogous predictions would
be expected with regards to the relationship between listening

66

ROGOWSKY, CALHOUN, AND TALLAL

comprehension aptitude and learning from an audiobook and read-
ing comprehension aptitude and learning from e-text.

Method

Participants

In order to be included in this study, participants had to meet the
following inclusionary criteria: age 25– 40 years; college educated
(bachelor’s degree only); native speakers of English; normal hear-
ing and vision (with correction); and no self-reported history of
neurological or learning impairments. Potential participants out-
side this age range, who had more advanced degrees beyond a
bachelor’s degree, who had not graduated from college, or who
had a history of neurological or learning disabilities were ex-
cluded. Based on these criteria, 121 participants from the New
York City metropolitan area were selected. Of the total population
of 121 subjects, 62 were male and 59 were female. The mean age
of the participants was 30.6 years (SD (cid:2) 4.4). All participants
completed 16 years of education. This study examined the two
research questions. For Research Question 1, the entire population
of 121 individuals participated. These 121 individuals were then
randomly assigned to four groups. Two of these groups (61 par-
ticipants) participated in Research Question 2. The remaining
participants who had been randomly assigned to the other two
groups participated in a different study that was not focused on
learning styles. The 61 participants in Research Question 2 were
randomly assigned to a listening condition (n (cid:2) 30) or a reading
condition (n (cid:2) 31). The analyses of Research Question 2 focused
only on those participants who could be categorically classified as
having an auditory or visual word learning style and who were
randomly assigned to either a listening or reading condition. The
final four subgroups included in Research Question 2 analyses
were listening condition with auditory learning style (n (cid:2) 11),
listening condition with visual word learning style (n (cid:2) 10),
reading condition with auditory learning style (n (cid:2) 10), and
reading condition with visual word learning style (n (cid:2) 10).

This study was conducted in accordance with the prescribed
standards of the institutional review board of Rutgers University–
Newark. All participants provided informed consent and were
financially compensated for their participation.

Learning Styles Assessment

Prior to on-site testing, participants completed an online stan-
dardized learning styles preference inventory. Pashler et al. (2008)
identified the Dunn and Dunn learning styles model as being one
of the most popular learning styles assessment tools because of the
constructs included as well as the broad age range of the assess-
ments offered—from children as young as 3 years old through
adults. For this study, we selected the adult version, the Building
Excellence (BE) Online Learning Styles Assessment Inventory for
ages 17 and older (Rundle & Dunn, 2010). The BE Learning Styles
Inventory is a self-administered online survey that requires 20 –25
min for completion. The assessment measure asks participants to
decide if they strongly disagree, disagree, are uncertain, agree, or
strongly agree after reading statements indicating, for example,
whether the respondent remembers new information better by
reading about it or by listening to a discussion about it (Rundle &

Dunn, 2010). The BE Learning Styles Inventory assesses individ-
learning and productivity styles based upon six domains:
ual
perceptual, psychological, environmental, physiological, emo-
tional, and sociological. The perceptual domain is subdivided into
the following six elements: auditory (input), visual picture, visual
word, tactual, kinesthetic, and auditory verbal (output). The BE
Learning Styles Inventory provides an individual’s strengths and
weaknesses pertaining to these six possible perceptual learning
styles. For each learning style preference, individuals are placed
into one of five bins that are continuous, ranging from very weak
to very strong. For example, the five bins for auditory are classi-
fied as (1) strong less auditory, (2) moderate less auditory, (3) it
depends, (4) moderate more auditory, and (5) strong more audi-
tory. Within each bin, there is a 3-point range with the exception
of Bin 3 (it depends) that has a 5-point range, for a total of 17
possible placements along the continuum for each perceptual ele-
ment. For the purpose of this study, we focused only on those
elements (auditory and visual word) that most relate to listening
and reading comprehension, respectively.

The BE Learning Styles Inventory provides personalized reports
that convert an individual’s numerical score into instructional
recommendations. For example, if a participant scores strong less
auditory or moderate less auditory (Bin 1 or Bin 2, respectively/
corresponding Placements 1– 6), the recommendation prescribed
by the BE Learning Styles Inventory would be that because lis-
tening is not a strength, the participant should rely on a stronger
style when learning new material. If a participant scores strong less
visual word or moderate less visual word (Bin 1 or Bin 2, respec-
tively/corresponding Placements 1– 6), the recommendation pre-
scribed would be that because reading is not a strength,
the
participant should rely on a stronger style when learning new and
difficult information. If a participant scores it depends in either
auditory or visual word (Bin 3/corresponding Placements 7–11),
the BE Learning Styles recommendation acknowledges that the
participant is indifferent to the modality. He or she is encouraged
to use one of his or her strengths when learning new information.
If a participant scores moderate more auditory/visual or strong
more auditory/visual (Bin 4 or Bin 5, respectively/corresponding
Placements 12–17), the individual is advised to use that style most
of the time when learning. While the automated computer scoring
system generated scores and reports for each participant, the par-
ticipants were not informed about the purpose of the study or given
access to their scores or reports or given any feedback from this
survey.

In this study, learning styles data were analyzed using two
different scoring procedures. For correlation and regression anal-
yses, data were analyzed using the full standard continuous 17-
point scoring method provided by the BE Learning Styles Inven-
tory. Three variables were used: BE auditory (range (cid:2) from (cid:3)1
to (cid:3)17), BE visual word (range (cid:2) from (cid:3)1 to(cid:3)17), and the
difference between BE auditory and BE visual word (range from
–17 to (cid:3)17). In this study, participants’ BE auditory scores ranged
from (cid:3)2 to(cid:3)17, their visual word scores ranged from (cid:3)5 to(cid:3)17
and the difference between BE auditory minus BE visual word
scores ranged from –11 to (cid:3)8. (M (cid:2) – 0.92, SD (cid:2) 3.98).

In addition, in order to follow the analysis prescribed by Pashler
et al. (2008), which addressed the meshing hypothesis directly,
individuals must first be divided into groups on the basis of their
preferred learning style. For this purpose, participants were clas-

MATCHING LEARNING STYLE TO INSTRUCTIONAL CONDITION

67

sified categorically as having primarily either an auditory or visual
word learning style. We used the five bin categories provided by
the BE Learning Styles Inventory: strong less auditory/visual
word (cid:2) 1; moderate less auditory/visual word (cid:2) 2; it depends (cid:2)
3; moderate more auditory/visual word (cid:2) 4; and strong more
auditory/visual word (cid:2) 5. According to the BE Learning Styles
Inventory, only participants who scored moderate to strong more
auditory (either a 4 or 5) aswell as
it depends or moderate to
strong less visual word (3, 2, 1) were instructed to use the auditory
modality “much of the time.” For the purposes of this analysis,
these participants were classified as having an auditory learning
style (n (cid:2) 37). Similarly, only participants who scored moderate to
strong more visual word (either a 4 or 5) aswell as it depends or
moderate to strong less auditory (3, 2, 1) were instructed to use the
visual word modality “much of the time.” These participants were
classified as having a visual word learning style (n (cid:2) 31). Of the
121 individuals who participated in Research Question 1, 53
participants could not be categorically classified as either auditory
or visual word learners and, as such, were not included in the
analyses that required categorical classification.

Verbal Comprehension Aptitude Measure

the Gray Oral Reading Test

The goal of this study was to determine the extent to which
learning style preference (auditory, visual) and/or verbal aptitude (listen-
ing comprehension, reading comprehension) relates to the effective-
ness of instructional method (audiobook, e-text). Because there is
no standardized assessment designed to directly compare listening
and reading comprehension aptitude in adults, we developed a
verbal comprehension aptitude test in both a listening and reading
format using matched passages from two equivalent forms of the
fourth edition of
(GORT– 4).
GORT– 4 is a standardized assessment measure composed of lev-
eled passages that objectively measure oral reading rate, accuracy,
fluency, and comprehension, as well as alerts to possible learning
exceptionalities (Weiderholt & Bryant, 2000). GORT– 4 (age
range: from 6.0 to 18.11 years) consists of 13 passages that
become increasingly difficult as the examinee progresses. After
pilot testing all passages in college-educated adults, we selected
passages 9, 10, 11, and 13 for use in this study. Passages 1– 8 and
12 did not provide sufficient individual differences in our college-
educated population and were not included. None of the individ-
uals who participated in pilot testing were included in the current
study. The selected passages ranged from 148 to 167 words (M (cid:2)
158, Mdn (cid:2) 157). Each passage was followed by five comprehen-
sion questions. To assess listening comprehension, we converted
the selected passages from Form B of the GORT-4 into a digital
audio recording. A professional audiobook narrator, who read at a
steady pace and with natural intonation, recorded the passages. We
will refer to this assessment as the Listening Aptitude Test (L–AT).
To assess reading comprehension, we asked each participant to
read the selected passages from Form A of the GORT-4 silently.
This assessment will be referred to as the Reading Aptitude Test
(R–AT).

Each of the 121 participants in this study was tested on both the
L–AT and the R–AT. The order in which the L–AT and the R–AT
were taken was counterbalanced to reduce the chance that the
order of testing would adversely influence the results. Half of the
participants completed the R–AT and then L–AT, where they read

the first four passages and then listened to the remaining four
passages; the other half of the participants completed the L–AT
and then R–AT, where they listened to the first four passages and
then read the remaining four passages. Participants read each
passage silently from a computer screen or listened through head-
phones to a digital audio recording.

Immediately after they read or listened to each passage, partic-
ipants answered the five corresponding multiple-choice questions
for that passage. Note that part of the answer from one of the
questions on the R–AT was accidentally omitted. Therefore, data
could only be collected from 19 of the 20 questions. To assure that
the R–AT and the L–AT remained equivalent, the comparable
question from the L–AT was also deleted from all analyses. The
protocol designed by Pashler et al. (2008) to assess the meshing
hypothesis requires individuals to complete an assessment that is
the same for all participants. All participants answered the com-
prehension questions in the same (written) format. We chose to
focus on this response format because most tests of comprehension
are administered in writing. The program required a response for
each question before the participant could proceed to the next
question. Participants were not permitted to re-read or re-listen to
any passage nor were they allowed to use the passage as a refer-
ence when answering the questions. No feedback was given.

Instructional Unit

Two modes of instruction were investigated for the same unit
(audiobook, e-text). The content used across both of these instruc-
tional conditions was the preface and Chapter 17 of the nonfiction
book, Unbroken: A World War II Story of Survival, Resilience, and
Redemption, written by Laura Hillenbrand and read by Edward
Hermann. The total content contained 3,184 words. Forty-eight
multiple-choice questions were designed to assess the participants’
comprehension. These 48 questions will be referred to as the
Unbroken comprehension test.

The question set was developed by a certified teacher of English
(B.R.), who serves on the Pennsylvania State Standardized Assess-
ment Panel where she reviews reading assessment items for con-
tent, rigor, alignment, bias, and universal and technical design.
Questions were piloted for difficulty on a sample of 10 individuals
meeting the eligibility requirements for participants in this study
but were not participants in the study. The Unbroken comprehen-
sion test was given twice, once immediately following completion
of the passage (Time 1) and again 2 weeks later (Time 2).

Procedure

After completing the Listening Aptitude Test (L–AT) and Read-
ing Aptitude Test (R–AT), participants were randomly assigned to
one of two instructional conditions for the Unbroken portion of the
study. Participants in each of the instructional conditions received
the preface and Chapter 17 of Unbroken, presented in one of two
different formats. In the audiobook condition, participants used
headphones to listen to both the preface and Chapter 17 of Un-
broken presented on an electronic tablet in digital audiobook
format. In the e-text condition, participants read both the preface
and Chapter 17 of Unbroken presented on an electronic tablet in
e-text format. A research assistant pre-cued the e-text or audio, as
well as monitored the participant to assure that there were no

68

ROGOWSKY, CALHOUN, AND TALLAL

interruptions and that the participant understood how to use the
equipment, was on-task, and did not extend reading/listening be-
yond the prescribed passages. Prior to administration of the pas-
sage for the audio condition, the volume was adjusted to a com-
fortable level. The audio condition lasted 16 min 24 s and was read
at a pace of 149 words per minute. Participants in the e-text
time restraint. The
their own pace without
condition read at
replaying/fast-forwarding of audio and the re-reading/skipping of
text were prohibited. The research assistant monitored partici-
pants’ compliance.

Upon completion of Chapter 17, participants proceeded imme-
diately (Time 1) to take the Unbroken comprehension test and
answer 48 questions derived from the preface and Chapter 17.
Participants were not allowed to use the e-text or digital audiobook
as a reference. Each question was individually displayed in written
text only on a computer screen, as is common in standard testing
practices. The online multiple-choice assessment required a re-
sponse for each question before the examinee could proceed to the
next question. No feedback was given. In addition to the online,
on-site immediate comprehension assessment (Time 1), partici-
pants completed the same multiple-choice assessment online 2
weeks later (Time 2) in order to evaluate their retention of the
information in the story.

Results

Analyses for Research Question 1

Research Question 1 addresses the extent to which learning style
preferences (auditory, visual word) as measured by the BE Learn-
ing Style Inventory equate to learning aptitudes (listening compre-
hension, reading comprehension) as measured by the L–AT and
the R–AT.

To evaluate the equivalence of the L–AT and the R–AT for
assessing comprehension aptitude in this population (N (cid:2) 121), we
calculated a paired-samples t test comparing the mean of the L–AT
(M (cid:2) 13.9, SD (cid:2) 3.4) to the mean of the R–AT (M (cid:2) 12.8, SD (cid:2)
2.8). A significant difference was found, t(120) (cid:2) 3.54; p (cid:4) .01.
The mean of the L–AT was significantly higher than the mean on
the R–AT with an effect size of Cohen’s d (cid:2) 0.32. Although this
difference was not ideal, it is important to note that the main
hypothesis pertaining to the interaction between learning style and
mode of instruction does not require that the R–AT and L–AT
measures be equivalent.

Analyses using categorical learning style variables to predict
learning aptitude: Implementing the Pashler et al. (2008)
method. Pashler et al. (2008) prescribed a specific methodology
for assessing the meshing hypothesis that requires that participants
be categorically classified into two discrete learning styles (audi-
tory learners or visual word learners). To follow this methodology
explicitly, participants were classified into two discrete learning
style categories: auditory learners (n (cid:2) 37) or visual word learners
(n (cid:2) 31) as described in the Methods section.

A one-way multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) was
calculated examining the effects of learning style preference
groups (auditory, visual word) on the L–AT and R–AT scores to
determine if learning style preference (auditory, visual word) pre-
dicts listening or reading comprehension aptitude. A significant
effect of aptitude test (L–AT vs. R–AT) was found, F(1, 66) (cid:2)

12.7; p (cid:4) .05, with an effect size (cid:5)2 (cid:2) 0.16, indicating that
participants performed significantly better on one aptitude test (L–AT:
M (cid:2) 14.1, SD (cid:2) 3.5) than on the other aptitude test (R–AT: M (cid:2)
12.8, SD (cid:2) 2.9). There was also a significant effect of learning
styles preference (auditory vs. visual word), F(1, 66) (cid:2) 6.9; p (cid:4)
.05, with an effect size (cid:5)2 (cid:2) 0.09, indicating that participants in
one learning styles preference group (visual word: M (cid:2) 14.4,
SD (cid:2) 4.0) performed significantly better than the participants in
the other learning styles preference group (auditory, M (cid:2) 12.6,
SD (cid:2) 3.6). There was not a significant aptitude test (L–AT, R–AT)
by learning styles preference (auditory, visual word) interaction,
F(1, 66) (cid:2) 0.34; p (cid:6) .05. Further inspection of these results using
one-way analyses of variance (ANOVAs) show that overall, par-
ticipants in the visual word learning style group scored signifi-
cantly higher on the L–AT, F(1, 66) (cid:2) 5.48, p (cid:4) .05 (M (cid:2) 15.16,
SD (cid:2) 3.10), than participants in the auditory learning style group
(M (cid:2) 13.22; SD (cid:2) 3.65). Participants in the visual word learning
style group also scored significantly higher on the R–AT, F(1,
66) (cid:2) 4.91; p (cid:4) .05 (M (cid:2) 13.58, SD (cid:2) 2.50), than participants in
the auditory learning style group (M (cid:2) 12.08; SD (cid:2) 2.99). These
results indicate that participants who had a visual word learning
style preference were significantly better at both listening and
reading comprehension, compared to those who had an auditory
learning style preference.

According to Pashler et al. (2008), acceptable evidence in sup-
port of the meshing hypothesis would show a crossover between
two learning style preference groups (auditory, visual word) and
listening and reading comprehension aptitude (L–AT, R–AT), as
shown in Figure 1A. Figure 1B shows an example taken from
Pashler et al. (2008) of one form of unacceptable evidence for the
meshing hypothesis, where both auditory and visual word learning
style preference groups score higher on the same method, and
hence there is no crossover. Figure 1C shows the data from the
current study. As shown in Figure 1C, contrary to the crossover
pattern that would be expected to support the meshing hypothesis,
the auditory and visual word learning style preference groups both
scored higher on listening comprehension than on reading com-
prehension. It is important to note that not only was the L–AT
performance better for both groups but also the superiority of the
L–AT over the R–AT was similar for both groups. According to
Pashler et al. (2008), this pattern corresponds to one example of
unacceptable evidence in support of the meshing hypothesis.

However, classification of participants into two discrete groups
reduces the sensitivity of continuous variables and also reduced the
sample size by including only those participants who had a clear auditory
or visual word learning style preference. To mitigate these concerns, we
performed a final series of correlation and step-wise multiple re-
gression analyses (n (cid:2) 121) to evaluate whether there was a
significant relationship between learning style preference (BE
Learning Styles Inventory) and learning aptitude (L–AT, R–AT).
For these analyses, variables from the BE Learning Styles Inven-
tory based on the continuous 17-point standard BE scoring system
were used to predict verbal comprehension aptitude scores on the
L–AT and R–AT.

Correlation and regression analyses for Research Question
1. The relationship between learning style preference (BE Learn-
ing Styles Inventory) and listening and reading comprehension
aptitude (L–AT and R–AT) was evaluated by a series of simple
correlation analyses as well as stepwise multiple regression anal-

MATCHING LEARNING STYLE TO INSTRUCTIONAL CONDITION

69

A1

Acceptable Evidence

B1

e
r
o
c
S

t
s
e
T

Method 2

Method 1

Unacceptable Evidence
S
Method 2
t
a
n
d
a
r
d
Method 1
s

M
e
e
t
s

Style A

Style B

Style A

Style B

Type of Learner

Type of Learner

1C

18

16

14

12

10

)
e
r
o
c
S
w
a
R

(

e
d
u
t
i
t
p
A
n
o
i
s
n
e
h
e
r
p
m
o
C

L-AT

R-AT

Auditory

Visual Word

Learning Style Preference Group

Figure 1. Graph A displays the pattern of evidence required to support
the meshing hypothesis while Graph B displays one of several patterns of
evidence that would constitute unacceptable evidence (according to Pashler
et al., 2008). Graph C displays the results from the current study, which
show that there is no crossover effect. Bars represent standard errors. The
95% confidence interval (CI) for the Listening Aptitude Test (L–AT)
ranged from 12.10 to 14.33 for participants with an auditory learning
preference and from 13.94 to 16.39 for participants with a visual learning
preference. The 95% CI for the Reading Aptitude Test (R–AT) ranged
from 11.17 to 12.99 for participants with an auditory learning preference
and from 12.58 to 14.58 for participants with a visual learning preference.

yses. For these analyses, the following variables from the BE
Learning Styles Inventory were used based on the 17-point stan-
dard BE scoring system: BE auditory score, BE visual word score,
and the difference between the BE auditory score and the BE
visual word score (BE auditory score (cid:7) BE visual word score), to
predict verbal comprehension aptitude. Verbal comprehension ap-
titude outcomes of interest included (a) predicting listening apti-
tude (L–AT raw score), (b) predicting reading aptitude (R–AT raw

score), and (c) predicting the difference between listening and
reading aptitude (L–AT (cid:7) R–AT raw score). Table 1 presents the
means and standard deviations for each of the BE learning styles
and verbal comprehension variables as well as the correlation
matrix for these variables, and Table 2 presents the results of the
multiple regression analyses.

Predicting listening comprehension aptitude from learning
style preference scores. The meshing hypothesis predicts a pos-
itive correlation between learning style preference and aptitude.
That is, if auditory learning style equates to listening comprehen-
sion aptitude, as auditory learning style preference scores increase,
listening comprehension aptitude score would also increase. As
seen in Table 1, contrary to expectation based on the meshing
hypothesis, the correlation between auditory learning style prefer-
ence (based on the BE auditory score) and listening comprehen-
sion (based on the L–AT score) was negative (–.31, p (cid:4) .01). To
further test whether other learning style variables influence listen-
ing comprehension aptitude, we calculated multiple linear regres-
sion analyses to determine the extent to which participants’ listen-
ing comprehension aptitude (L–AT) could be predicted based on
their BE auditory learning style score, BE visual word learning
style score, and the difference between their BE auditory and BE
visual word scores. As seen in Table 2, a significant regression
equation was found, F(1, 119) (cid:2) 12.96, p (cid:4) .001, with an R2 of
.10. The only BE learning style variable that contributed signifi-
cantly to the listening comprehension score was the BE auditory
learning style score. This single variable contributed a correlation
coefficient of R (cid:2) .31, R2 (cid:2) .10 (SE (cid:2) 3.28), p (cid:4) .001. Partici-
pants’ predicted listening comprehension score is equal to 17.20
(constant) (cid:3) – 0.30 (BE auditory learning style score), indicating a
negative relationship between the BE auditory learning style score
and the listening comprehension aptitude score. The coefficient
model shows that for every 1 point that the BE auditory learning
style score decreased, the listening comprehension score increased
0.30 points. BE visual word learning style score and the difference
between BE auditory learning style score and BE visual word
learning style score failed to contribute any significant variance
beyond that already accounted for by the BE auditory learning
style score. This analysis demonstrated that only the BE auditory
learning style score accounted for a significant portion of the
listening comprehension variance. However, contrary to what
would be predicted by the meshing hypothesis, this relationship

Table 1
Descriptive Statistics and Correlation Matrix for the Predictor Variables Entered into the
Multiple Regression Aptitude Model for Research Question 1

Variable

M

SD

1

2

3

4

5

6

1. Listening aptitude
2. Reading aptitude
3. Difference between listening and

reading aptitude

4. BE auditory learning style
5. BE visual word learning style
6. Difference between BE auditory and

visual word learning styles

13.87
12.81

1.67
10.98
11.89

3.44 — .46
2.78

.66 (cid:7).31(cid:2)(cid:2) (cid:7).14
— (cid:7).37 (cid:7).24(cid:2)(cid:2) (cid:7).04

3.28
3.55
2.13

—

(cid:7).13
—

(cid:7).11
.081
—

(cid:7)0.92

3.99

(cid:7).21(cid:2)
(cid:7).19(cid:2)

(cid:7).054
.85(cid:2)(cid:2)
(cid:7).46(cid:2)(cid:2)

—

n (cid:2) 121; BE (cid:2) Building Excellence.

Note.
(cid:2) p (cid:4) .05.

(cid:2)(cid:2) p (cid:4) .01.

 
 
 
 
 
70

ROGOWSKY, CALHOUN, AND TALLAL

Table 2
Coefficients for the Significant Predictor Variables Entered into
the Multiple Regression Model for Listening Aptitude, Reading
Aptitude, and Difference Between Listening and Reading
Aptitude for Research Question 1

Variable

B

SEB

Listening aptitude

Constant
BE auditory learning style

score
Reading aptitude

Constant
BE auditory learning style

score

Difference between listening and

(cid:8)

(cid:2)(cid:2)

R

R2

.31

.10

17.20

0.97

(cid:7)0.30

0.084 (cid:7).31(cid:2)(cid:2)

14.84

0.81

(cid:2)(cid:2)

(cid:7)0.18

0.070 (cid:7).24(cid:2)(cid:2)

.24

.06

reading aptitude

—

—

—

Note. The following predictor variables were entered into the model for
(a) listening aptitude, (b) reading aptitudes, and (c) difference between
listening and reading aptitudes; Building Excellence (BE) auditory learning
style score; BE visual word learning style score; and the difference be-
tween BE auditory and BE visual word score. Only the variables listed
above made significant contributions to these models. No variables made
significant contributions to the model for difference between listening and
reading aptitude. Shown are the coefficients (B), the standard error of the
coefficients (SEB), as well as standardized coefficient ((cid:8)), and the corre-
lation. N (cid:2) 121.
(cid:2) p (cid:4) .05.

(cid:2)(cid:2) p (cid:4) .01.

was negative. That is, as auditory learning style preference in-
creased, performance on a listening aptitude test decreased.

Predicting reading comprehension aptitude from learning
preference scores. The meshing hypothesis would predict that if
visual word learning style preference equates to reading compre-
hension aptitude, as participants’ visual word learning style pref-
erence score increased, their reading comprehension aptitude score
would also increase. As shown in Table 1, the correlation between
visual word learning style preference (based on the BE visual word
score) and reading comprehension (based on the R–AT score) was
neither positive nor significant (–.04). To further test whether other
learning style variables influence reading comprehension aptitude,
we calculated a multiple linear regression analysis to determine the
extent to which participants’ reading comprehension aptitude (R–
AT) could be predicted based on their BE auditory learning style
score, BE visual word learning style score, and the difference
between their BE auditory and BE visual word scores. As seen in
Table 2, a significant regression equation was found, F(1, 119) (cid:2)
7.01, p (cid:4) .01, with an R2 of .06. However, the only BE variable
that contributed significantly to the reading comprehension score
was the BE auditory learning style score. This single variable
contributed a correlation coefficient of R (cid:2) .24, R2 (cid:2) .06 (SE (cid:2)
2.72), p (cid:4) .01. Participants’ predicted reading comprehension
score is equal to 14.84 (constant) (cid:3) – 0.18 (BE auditory learning
style score), indicating a negative relationship between BE audi-
tory learning style score and reading comprehension aptitude
score. The coefficient model shows that for every 1 point that the
BE auditory learning style score decreased, the reading compre-
hension score increased 0.18 points. Contrary to the assumption
that a visual verbal learning style preference would predict higher
reading scores, neither the BE visual word learning style score nor
the difference between the BE auditory learning style score and BE

visual word learning style score contributed any significant vari-
ance beyond that already accounted for by the BE auditory learn-
ing style score. This analysis demonstrated that auditory learning
style was also the only significant predictor of reading compre-
hension scores, and this relationship was again negative.

Predicting the difference between listening comprehension
aptitude and reading comprehension aptitude from learning
preference scores. The meshing hypothesis would predict that
individuals who have a stronger auditory learning style preference
would also have a higher listening versus reading comprehension
aptitude score, and conversely, those who have a stronger visual
word learning style preference would also have a higher reading
versus listening comprehension aptitude score. A multiple linear
regression was calculated to determine the extent to which partic-
ipants’ difference between listening comprehension aptitude (L–
AT) and reading comprehension aptitude (R–AT) could be pre-
dicted based on their BE auditory learning style score, BE visual
word learning style score, and the difference between their BE
auditory and BE visual word scores. This regression analysis most
completely tests the meshing hypothesis, which not only predicts
a simple relationship between learning style preference and com-
prehension aptitude but also and more specifically predicts that
individuals with different learning styles will perform differen-
tially with different modes of input. The results of this analysis
failed to support this prediction. None of the variables (BE audi-
tory learning style score, BE visual word learning style score, or
the difference between BE auditory and BE visual word scores)
contributed significantly to the difference between listening com-
prehension aptitude and reading comprehension aptitude.

Discussion of analyses for Research Question 1. Pashler et
al. (2008) pointed out that learning style preferences and learning
aptitudes are often considered to be overlapping constructs. After
all, it seems intuitive that individuals who prefer to listen would
perform better on a test of listening than reading comprehension
and, conversely, those who prefer reading would perform better on
a test of reading than listening comprehension. This relationship is
referred to as the meshing hypothesis. Research Question 1 was
designed as an empirical test of this hypothesis, as it pertains to
verbal comprehension aptitude. Participants completed the BE
Learning Styles Inventory as well as both a listening and a reading
comprehension aptitude test. A series of analyses were calculated
to determine the extent to which auditory and visual word learning
style variables predicted listening and/or reading comprehension
aptitude. Both a continuous score (based on the 17-point scale
established by the BE Learning Style Inventory) and a categorical
classification of participants as either an auditory learner or visual
word learner were included in these analyses. This categorical
classification was based on the 5-point BE scale and included only
those participants with a strong difference between their auditory
and visual word reading preference scores. Regardless of whether
continuous or categorical scores from the BE Learning Styles
Inventory were used, the results were consistent in failing to
provide statistically significant support for the meshing hypothesis.
Contrary to the expectations predicted by the meshing hypothesis,
that a high visual word learning style score would be the best
predictor of a high reading comprehension aptitude score, and
conversely, that a high auditory learning style score would be the
best predictor of a high listening comprehension aptitude score,
auditory learning style proved to be the only significant predictor

MATCHING LEARNING STYLE TO INSTRUCTIONAL CONDITION

71

of both reading and listening comprehension scores, and in both
cases this relationship was negative. That is, as individuals’ audi-
tory learning style preference scores increased, their performance
on both the listening and reading comprehension aptitude tests
decreased. Thus, the results using the BE learning style preference
scores both as a continuous scale as well as a discrete categorical
measure of auditory and visual word learning style preference fail
to demonstrate a significant positive relationship between (a) au-
ditory learning style preference and listening aptitude, (b) visual
word learning style preference and reading aptitude, or (c) a
differential effect of learning style preference on performance on a
listening compared with a reading comprehension aptitude test.
These findings fail to support the construct that an individual’s
learning style (auditory, visual word) is positively correlated with
their listening and reading aptitude. Taken together, these data fail
to provide statistical support for the meshing hypothesis, at least as
it pertains to verbal comprehension (listening vs. reading) apti-
tudes.

Limitations of analyses for Research Question 1. One poten-
tial concern for the analyses reported for Research Question 1 was
that the L–AT and R–AT were not matched for difficulty. It is
important to emphasize that the tests developed for this study to
assess listening and reading comprehension aptitude, while derived
from two equivalent forms of a standardized, normed reading test
(GORT– 4), were not given in the standard format on which these
norms were based. The main question of interest is whether there
was a differential pattern of results for auditory compared with
visual word learners when listening compared with reading. In this
study, both the auditory and the visual word learning style pref-
erence groups scored higher on the listening than on the reading
comprehension aptitude test. This could be an indication that the
listening version of the test was easier than the written version.
While equivalent scores would have been more ideal, it is impor-
tant to note that it is the pattern of the results, rather than the
absolute values, that is critical in addressing the meshing hypoth-
esis. As shown in Figure 1C, the difference in listening compared
with reading performance resulted in parallel lines for the auditory
learners compared with the visual word learners. That is, while
participants classified by the BE Learning Style Inventory as
auditory learners did, indeed, score higher on a comprehension test
when they listened to versus read passages, participants classified
as visual word learners showed a similar pattern; that is, they also
scored higher on this same comprehension test when they listened
to versus when they read the test passages—and to the same
degree. Taken in context, the results from Research Question 1 are
contrary to the pattern that would be expected based on the
meshing hypothesis, at least as it applies to tests of listening and
reading comprehension aptitude. However, this research question
does not address the issue of whether learning and retention of
“real-world,” nonfiction material, presented using different in-
structional methods, is affected by an individual’s preferred learn-
ing style. This was the focus of Research Question 2.

Analyses for Research Question 2

Research Question 2 addresses the extent to which learning style
preferences (as measured by the BE Learning Style Inventory)
and/or learning aptitudes (as measured by the L–AT and R–AT)
predict how much an individual comprehends and retains based on

mode of instruction (audiobook, e-text) as measured by the Un-
broken comprehension test.

The validity of the Unbroken comprehension test was evaluated
to assure that results obtained from this test were an accurate
measure of comprehension. To do this, the comprehension score of
each participant on the Unbroken comprehension test at Time 1
was compared with the same participant’s total comprehension
aptitude score (total verbal comprehension aptitude (cid:2) L–AT (cid:3)
R–AT). A Pearson correlation coefficient was calculated. A pos-
itive correlation was found, r(119) (cid:2) 0.59, p (cid:4) .001, indicating
there was a significant relationship between participants’
that
scores on the total verbal comprehension aptitude test and partic-
ipants’ scores on the Unbroken comprehension test at Time 1. This
analysis showed that participants who had higher comprehension
scores as indicated by the total verbal comprehension aptitude test
also had higher comprehension scores on the Unbroken test at
Time 1, providing construct validity for this test. Next, a Pearson
correlation coefficient was calculated for the relationship between
the Unbroken comprehension test at Time 1 and Time 2. A strong
positive correlation was found, r(118) (cid:2) 0.86, p (cid:4) .01, indicating
a significant linear relationship between the two variables. Partic-
ipants who performed well on the Unbroken comprehension test at
Time 1 performed well on this same test at Time 2. This linear
relationship indicates strong test–retest reliability for the Unbroken
comprehension test.

A 2 (modes of instruction) (cid:9) 2 (time) mixed-design ANOVA
was calculated to evaluate the effects of mode of instruction
(audiobook, e-text) and time (Time 1, Time 2) on the Unbroken
comprehension test scores. There was a main effect of time (Time
1 vs. Time 2), F(1, 58) (cid:2) 37.3; p (cid:4) .05. However, there was no
significant main effect for mode of instruction, F(1, 58) (cid:2) 0.25;
p (cid:6) .05. In addition, there was not a significant mode of instruction
by time interaction, F(1, 58) (cid:2) 0.08; p (cid:6) .05. These results
indicate that there was no difference in difficulty on the Unbroken
comprehension test when presented by audiobook versus e-text.
Moreover, all participants performed better in both instructional
conditions at Time 1 than Time 2.

Analyses using categorical learning style variables to predict
learning via audiobook versus e-text mode of instruction at
Time 1: The Pashler et al. (2008) method. When the meshing
hypothesis is applied to education theory and practice, it is as-
sumed that learning will be more effective when material is pre-
sented in an instructional mode that meshes with the individual’s
preferred learning style. Pashler et al.’s (2008) meshing hypothesis
pertaining to learning style preference and modes of instruction
predicts that individuals with a visual learning style preference will
comprehend better when they read rather than listen, and con-
versely, individuals with an auditory learning style preference will
comprehend better when they listen rather than read. The Pashler
et al. (2008) roadmap for evaluating the meshing hypothesis em-
pirically begins by dividing participants into distinct learning style
preference groups. Therefore, for this analysis, participants were
classified as auditory or visual word learners based on their BE
Learning Styles Inventory results, as described in the Methods
section.

Results from Research Question 1 showed that

there were
significant differences in reading and listening aptitude for study
participants based on their learning style preference. Recall that
participants with a visual word learning style preference achieved

72

ROGOWSKY, CALHOUN, AND TALLAL

both higher listening and reading aptitude scores than participants
in the auditory learning style preference group. As a result, to
control for any effect of potential differences in total verbal com-
prehension aptitude, based on the random assignment to instruc-
tional condition in Research Question 2, we conducted all analyses
both with and without co-varying out the effect of total reading and
listening aptitude. No significant differences were found with or
without the covariance. As such, only the ANOVA results are
reported. Table 3 shows the Unbroken comprehension test raw
scores (total number correct out of 48) by learning style preference
group (auditory, visual word) and instructional condition (audio-
book, e-text) at Time 1 and Time 2. A between-subjects 2 (learning
style preference) (cid:9) 2 (mode of instruction) ANOVA was per-
formed using these data to examine the effect of different learning
style preferences (auditory, visual word) and different modes of
instruction (audiobook, e-text) on the Unbroken comprehension
test scores at Time 1. The results of this analysis showed that the
main effect for learning style preference was significant, F(1,
37) (cid:2) 6.11; p (cid:4) .05, indicating a significant difference between
participants with an auditory learning style preference (M (cid:2) 30.57;
SD (cid:2) 5.89), and those with a visual word learning style (M (cid:2)
34.40; SD (cid:2) 3.33). This demonstrates that Unbroken comprehen-
sion at Time 1 was affected by learning style preference, with the
participants with visual word learning styles performing better.
However, the main effect for instructional condition (audiobook,
e-text) was not significant, F(1, 37) (cid:2) .15; p (cid:6) .05, with no
significant difference in performance on the Unbroken compre-
hension test at Time 1 between participants in the audiobook
condition (M (cid:2) 32.10; SD (cid:2) 6.00) and those in the e-text condi-
tion (M (cid:2) 32.80; SD (cid:2) 4.16). Finally, the interaction between
instructional condition (audiobook, e-text) and learning style pref-
erence (auditory, visual word) was not significant, F(1, 37) (cid:2)
0.42; p (cid:6) .05, indicating that providing instruction in a mode that
matched an individual’s learning style preference did not result in
significantly better learning. Figure 2C shows the results of this
analysis.

According to Pashler et al. (2008), acceptable evidence in sup-
port of the meshing hypothesis would show a crossover between
the two learning style preference groups and two modes of instruc-
tion, as shown in Figure 2A. Figure 2B shows an example from
Pashler et al. (2008) of unacceptable evidence for the meshing
hypothesis, where both auditory and visual word learning style
preference groups score higher on the same method of instruction,
and hence there is no crossover. As seen in Figure 2C, contrary to

Table 3
Unbroken Comprehension Test Raw Scores (Total Number
Correct Out of 48) by Learning Style Preference Group and
Instructional Condition at Time 1 and Time 2

Building Excellence learning preference

Auditory

Visual word

Instructional condition

Audiobook (Time 1)
E-text (Time 1)
Audiobook (Time 2)
E-text (Time 2)

n

11
10
11
10

M

29.82
31.40
26.64
28.10

SD

7.10
4.43
7.06
4.07

n

10
10
10
10

M

34.60
34.20
32.70
31.80

SD

3.27
3.55
4.30
4.34

A2

Acceptable Evidence

B2

e
r
o
c
S

t
s
e
T

Method 2

Method 1

t

Unacceptable Evidence
S
a
Method 2
n
d
a
r
d
Method 1
s

M
e
e

t
s

Style A

Style B

Style A

Style B

Type of Learner

Type of Learner

2C

1

i

e
m
T
t
a
n
o
i
s
n
e
h
e
r
p
m
o
C
n
e
k
o
r
b
n
U

38

36

34

32

30

28

26

E-Text

Audiobook

Auditory

Visual Word

Learning Style Preference Group

Figure 2. Examples of (A) acceptable evidence and (B) unacceptable
evidence for the meshing hypothesis (according to Pashler et al., 2008).
Graph C displays the results from this study and corresponds to one of
Pashler et al.’s (2008) examples of unacceptable evidence. Error bars
represent standard errors. The 95% confidence interval (CI) for the audio-
book condition ranged from 26.82 to 32.81 for participants with an audi-
tory learning preference and from 31.46 to 37.74 for participants with a
visual learning preference. The 95% CI for the e-text group ranged from
28.26 to 34.54 for participants with an auditory learning preference and
from 31.06 to 37.34 for participants with a visual learning preference.

the crossover pattern that would be expected to support the mesh-
ing hypothesis, results from the current study show there is min-
imal difference based on instructional condition for participants in
either the auditory or visual word learning style preference groups.
According to Pashler et al. (2008), this pattern corresponds with
one example of unacceptable evidence in support of the meshing
hypothesis.

Two-week retention (Time 2).

It is possible that presenting
instruction in a mode that meshes with an individual’s learning
style may affect longer term retention of information. To address
this possibility, we calculated a 2 (learning style preference) (cid:9) 2
(mode of instruction) ANOVA to examine the long-term (2-week)
effect of instructional condition (audiobook, e-text) and learning
style preference (auditory, visual word) on Unbroken comprehen-
sion test scores at Time 2. The results at Time 2 parallel those
found at Time 1. That
the main effect for learning style
preference was significant, F(1, 37) (cid:2) 9.18; p (cid:4) .05, indicating
that Unbroken comprehension test scores at Time 2 were affected
by learning style preference. Participants with an auditory learning
style preference performed significantly more poorly (M (cid:2) 27.33;
SD (cid:2) 5.74) than those with a visual word learning style preference
(M (cid:2) 32.25; SD (cid:2) 4.23). The main effect of group was not
significant, F(1, 37) (cid:2) .03; p (cid:6) .05, with no significant difference
between participants using an audiobook (M (cid:2) 29.52; SD (cid:2) 6.55),
and those using e-text (M (cid:2) 29.95; SD (cid:2) 4.51). Finally, the

is,

 
 
 
 
 
 
MATCHING LEARNING STYLE TO INSTRUCTIONAL CONDITION

73

interaction between instructional condition and learning style pref-
erence was not significant, F(1, 37) (cid:2) 0.54; p (cid:6) .05, indicating
that providing instruction in a mode that matched an individual’s
learning style preference did not result
in significantly better
retention.

There were no significant interactions between learning style
preference and mode of instruction based on a categorical classi-
fication of participants into two discrete groups, those with an
auditory and those with a visual word learning style. However,
classification of participants into two discrete groups reduced the
sensitivity of continuous variables and also reduced the sample
size by including only those participants who had a clear auditory
or visual word learning style preference. To mitigate these con-
cerns, we conducted a final series of correlation and stepwise
multiple regression analyses to evaluate whether there was a
relationship among learning style preference (BE
significant
Learning Styles Inventory), learning aptitude (L–AT, R–AT), and
mode of instruction (digital audiobook, e-text). For these analyses,
variables from the BE Learning Styles Inventory based on the
continuous 17-point standard BE scoring system and verbal apti-
tude scores based on the L–AT and R–AT were used to predict (a)
learning outcomes from the audiobook mode of instruction and (b)
learning outcomes from the e-text mode of instruction (Table 4).
Correlation and regression analyses for Research Question 2.
Predicting audiobook learning outcomes from learning style
preference and verbal aptitude scores at Time 1. The meshing
hypothesis predicts a positive correlation between learning style
preference and instructional mode. That is, as auditory learning
style preference scores increase, learning outcomes via the audio-
book mode of instruction, but not via the e-text mode of instruc-
tion, would also increase. As seen in Table 4, counter to what
would be predicted by the meshing hypothesis, when the Pearson
correlation was calculated examining the relationship between
auditory learning style preference and learning from an audiobook,
a weak negative correlation that was not significant was found,
r(28) (cid:2) –.30, p (cid:6) .05. When the Pearson correlation was calcu-
lated examining the relationship between visual word learning

style preference and learning from an audiobook, the results were
similar; a weak negative correlation that was not significant was
found, r(28) (cid:2) –.24, p (cid:6) .05.

Similarly, to further test whether any other learning style or
aptitude variables influenced learning outcomes from the audio-
book mode, a multiple linear regression was calculated to deter-
mine the extent to which participants’ learning of nonfiction ma-
terial presented in audiobook format (instructional condition)
could be predicted based on their learning style preference (BE
auditory, BE visual word, and the difference between BE auditory
and BE visual word scores) as well as comprehension aptitude
(R–AT, L–AT, and verbal comprehension aptitude difference). As
seen in Table 5, a significant regression equation was found, F(1,
28) (cid:2) 16.18, p (cid:4) .001. Listening aptitude (L–AT) was the only
variable that contributed significantly to the comprehension of the
material presented via the audiobook condition. This single vari-
able contributed a correlation coefficient of 0.61, R2 (cid:2) .37 (SE (cid:2)
5.43), p (cid:4) .001. The regression equation showed that comprehen-
sion of material in the audiobook instructional condition was equal
to 15.71 (constant) (cid:3) 1.15 (listening comprehension aptitude),
indicating a positive relationship between listening aptitude, and
auditory instruction. The coefficient model shows that for every 1
point the audiobook comprehension increased, the listening apti-
tude score increased 1.15 points. This analysis demonstrated that
only a component of aptitude (L–AT) contributed significantly to
the variance in learning based on auditory instruction. BE auditory
learning style score, BE visual word learning style score, and the
difference between BE auditory and BE visual word score, as well
as reading aptitude (R–AT), and the difference between listening
aptitude and reading aptitude (L–AT—R–AT), failed to contribute
any significant variance beyond that already accounted for by the
listening aptitude score.

Predicting e-text learning outcomes from learning style pref-
erence and verbal aptitude scores at Time 1. The meshing
hypothesis predicts a positive correlation between learning style
preference and instructional mode. That is, as visual word learning
style preference scores increase, learning outcomes via the e-text

Table 4
Descriptive Statistics and Correlation Matrix for the Predictor Variables Entered into the Multiple Regression Model for the
Audiobook and e-Text Instructional Conditions at Time 1 as Described in Research Question 2

Condition

Audiobook

1. Listening aptitude
2. Reading aptitude
3. Difference between listening and reading aptitude
4. BE auditory learning style
5. BE visual learning style
6. Difference between BE auditory and visual learning styles

E-text

1. Listening aptitude
2. Reading aptitude
3. Difference between listening and reading aptitude
4. BE auditory learning style
5. BE visual learning style
6. Difference between BE auditory and visual learning styles

Note. BE (cid:2) Building Excellence.
(cid:2)(cid:2) p (cid:4) .01.
(cid:2) p (cid:4) .05.

Unbroken comprehension test results at Time 1

n

30
30
30
30
30
30
30
31
31
31
31
31
31
31

M

30.87
13.17
12.30
0.87
10.50
11.80
(cid:7)1.30
31.35
14.42
13.10
1.32
10.97
11.97
(cid:7)1.00

SD

6.70
3.52
3.25
3.54
3.95
2.23
4.62
5.40
3.74
2.72
3.54
3.70
2.30
4.46

1

.61(cid:2)(cid:2)

2

.45(cid:2)
.46(cid:2)

.70(cid:2)(cid:2)

.45(cid:2)
.43(cid:2)

3

4

.19
.58(cid:2)(cid:2)
(cid:7).46(cid:2)(cid:2)

.39(cid:2)
.72(cid:2)(cid:2)

(cid:7).31

(cid:7).30
(cid:7).40
(cid:7).42(cid:2)
(cid:7).01

(cid:7).25
(cid:7).40(cid:2)
(cid:7).20
(cid:7).27

5

(cid:7).24
(cid:7).08
(cid:7).03
(cid:7).05
(cid:7).04

.05
(cid:7).01
.19
(cid:7).16
(cid:7).05

6

(cid:7).14
(cid:7).30
(cid:7).34
.02
.88(cid:2)(cid:2)
(cid:7).30(cid:2)(cid:2)

(cid:7).24
(cid:7).33
(cid:7).26
(cid:7).14

.86(cid:2)(cid:2)
(cid:7).56(cid:2)(cid:2)

74

ROGOWSKY, CALHOUN, AND TALLAL

Table 5
Coefficients for the Significant Predictor Variables Entered into
the Multiple Regression Model for Audiobook and E-Text
Learning at Time 1 as Described in Research Question 2

Variable

B

SEB

(cid:8)

R

R2

N

Audiobook
Learning
Constant
Listening aptitude

E-text

Learning
Constant
Listening aptitude

15.71
1.15

16.80
1.01

3.89
0.29

2.86
0.19

(cid:2)(cid:2)
.61(cid:2)(cid:2)

(cid:2)(cid:2)
.70(cid:2)(cid:2)

.61

.37

30

.70

.49

31

Note. The following predictor variables were entered into the model for
audiobook and e-text learning: listening aptitude; reading aptitude; differ-
ence between listening and reading aptitude; Building Excellence (BE)
auditory learning style score; BE visual word learning style score; and the
difference between BE auditory and BE visual word score. Only the
variables listed above made significant contributions to the model. Shown
are the coefficients (B), the standard error of the coefficients (SEB), as well
as standardized coefficient ((cid:8)), and the correlation. N (cid:2) 30 (audiobook);
N (cid:2) 31 (e-text).
(cid:2) p (cid:4) .05.

(cid:2)(cid:2) p (cid:4) .01.

mode of instruction, but not via the audiobook mode of instruction,
would also increase. As shown in Table 4, when the Pearson
correlation coefficients were calculated, there was a weak positive
correlation between visual word learning style preference and
learning from e-text, r(29) (cid:2) .05, p (cid:6) .05, and a weak negative
correlation between auditory word learning style preference and
learning from e-text (r(29) (cid:2) –.24, p (cid:6) .05. However, neither
correlation was significant.

To further test whether any learning style or aptitude variables
influence learning outcomes from the e-text mode of instruction, a
multiple linear regression was calculated to determine the extent to
which participants’ learning of nonfiction material presented in
e-text format (instructional condition) could be predicted based on
their learning style preference (BE auditory, BE visual word, and
the difference between BE auditory and BE visual word scores) as
well as comprehension aptitude (R–AT, L–AT, and verbal com-
prehension aptitude difference). As shown in Table 5, a significant
regression equation was found, F(1, 29) (cid:2) 27.67, p (cid:4) .001 with an
R2 of .49. Contrary to what would be predicted by the meshing
hypothesis, however, the only variable that contributed signifi-
cantly to the learning of the material presented in the e-text
condition was listening comprehension aptitude (L–AT). This sin-
gle variable contributed a correlation coefficient of R (cid:2) .70, R2 (cid:2)
.49 (SE (cid:2) 3.93), p (cid:4) .001. The regression equation showed that
comprehension of material in the e-text instructional condition was
equal to 16.80 (constant) (cid:3) 1.01 (L–AT), indicating a positive
relationship between listening comprehension aptitude and learn-
ing from e-text instruction. The coefficient model shows that for
every 1 point e-text learning increased, listening comprehension
aptitude increased by 1.01 points. This analysis demonstrated that
only listening comprehension aptitude (L–AT) contributed signif-
icantly to the variance in learning material presented via e-text
instruction. BE auditory learning style score, BE visual word
learning style score, and the difference between BE auditory and
BE visual word score, as well as R–AT, total verbal comprehen-

sion aptitude, and the verbal comprehension aptitude difference
failed to contribute any significant variance in learning beyond that
already accounted for by the L–AT.

Predicting audiobook and e-text

learning outcomes from
learning style preference scores only at Time 1. When both
verbal comprehension aptitude and learning style preference vari-
ables were entered into multiple regression analyses to predict
learning via either audiobook or e-text modes of instruction, only
aptitude measures proved to significantly predict learning out-
comes. In a final attempt to find a significant relationship between
learning style preference and effects of instructional mode on
learning, we conducted a regression analysis using only learning
style preference variables (BE auditory, BE visual word, and the
difference between BE auditory and BE visual word scores) to
predict (a) audiobook and (b) e-text learning outcomes. The results
of these analyses failed to provide any statistically significant
support for the meshing hypothesis in that none of the BE learning
style preference variables accounted for a statistically significant
amount of variance for either audiobook (p (cid:6) .05) or e-text (p (cid:6)
.05) learning outcomes.

Predicting audiobook and e-text

learning outcomes from
learning style preference and verbal aptitude scores at Time 2.
Even if learning style preferences do not affect
immediate
learning of material based on mode of instruction (audiobook,
e-text), it is possible that presenting instruction in a mode that
meshes with an individual’s learning style may affect longer
term retention of information. Just as was done using the
categorical variables for learning style preference, all analyses
were repeated using the continuous variables based on the
2-week retention data obtained at Time 2. The results of these
analyses are shown in Tables 6 and 7. As can be seen by directly
comparing the correlation matrices obtained at Time 1 (Table 4)
with those obtained at Time 2 (Table 6), as well as the multiple
regression models obtained at Time 1 (Table 5) with those
obtained at Time 2 (Table 7), the results were very similar at
Time 2 to those found at Time 1. The only significant correla-
tion found between audiobook learning and auditory learning
style preference was found at Time 2, and this correlation was
negative (–.39, p (cid:4) .05). Similarly, results from the stepwise
multiple regression analyses were similar at Time 2 to those
found at Time 1; only aptitude scores positively predicted
audiobook and e-text
learning
preference variables entering the model (Table 7). Thus, similar
to the results pertaining to immediate learning obtained at Time
1, the results obtained at Time 2 failed to provide any statisti-
cally significant evidence that showed that providing individu-
als with instruction in a mode that meshes with their learning
style preference results in significantly better long-term reten-
tion of information.

learning, with no significant

Discussion of analyses for Research Question 2. Research
Question 2 investigated the meshing hypothesis as it pertains to
mode of instruction. Specifically, the meshing hypothesis predicts
that participants with an auditory learning style preference will
learn material better when instruction is presented via a listening
mode than when it is presented via a written mode and, conversely,
those with a visual word learning style preference will learn
material better after having read it rather than having listened to it.
An ANOVA was calculated to determine if the experiment pro-
vided any statistically significant evidence that showed that the

MATCHING LEARNING STYLE TO INSTRUCTIONAL CONDITION

75

Table 6
Descriptive Statistics and Correlation Matrix for the Predictor Variables Entered into the Multiple Regression Model for Audiobook
and E-Text Learning at Time 2 as Described in Research Question 2

Condition

Audiobook learning

1. Listening aptitude
2. Reading aptitude
3. Difference between listening and reading aptitude
4. BE auditory learning style
5. BE visual learning style
6. Difference between BE auditory and visual learning styles

E-text learning

1. Listening aptitude
2. Reading aptitude
3. Difference between listening and reading aptitude
4. BE auditory learning style
5. BE visual learning style
6. Difference between BE auditory and visual learning styles

Note. BE (cid:2) Building Excellence.
(cid:2)(cid:2) p (cid:4) .01.
(cid:2) p (cid:4) .05.

Unbroken comprehension test results at Time 2

n

30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30

M

28.20
13.17
12.30
0.87
10.50
11.80
(cid:7)1.30
29.13
14.60
12.97
1.63
10.80
11.87
(cid:7)1.07

SD

7.76
3.52
3.25
3.54
3.95
2.23
4.62
5.85
3.66
2.67
3.15
3.64
2.27
4.53

1

.70(cid:2)(cid:2)

2

.58(cid:2)(cid:2)
.46(cid:2)

.66(cid:2)(cid:2)

.52(cid:2)(cid:2)
.54(cid:2)

3

.16
.58(cid:2)(cid:2)
(cid:7).46(cid:2)(cid:2)

.32
.70(cid:2)(cid:2)

(cid:7).21

4

(cid:7).39(cid:2)
(cid:7).40(cid:2)
(cid:7).42(cid:2)
(cid:7).01

(cid:7).23
(cid:7).36(cid:2)
(cid:7).29
(cid:7).17

5

(cid:7).25
(cid:7).08
(cid:7).03
(cid:7).05
(cid:7).04

.19
.06
.13
(cid:7).05
(cid:7).12

6

(cid:7).21
(cid:7).30
(cid:7).34
.02
.88(cid:2)(cid:2)
(cid:7).52(cid:2)(cid:2)

(cid:7).28
(cid:7).32
(cid:7).30
(cid:7).12

.87(cid:2)(cid:2)
(cid:7).60(cid:2)(cid:2)

method most effective for instructing individuals with one learning
style is not the most effective method for individuals with a
different learning style. The results of these analyses failed to
provide empirical support for the meshing hypothesis. No signif-
icant interactions were found between learning style preference
(auditory, visual word) and instructional method (digital audio-
book, e-text) for either immediate learning or 2-week retention of
verbal information.

A second series of simple and multiple regression analyses were
conducted using continuous variables of both learning style pref-
erence as well as verbal comprehension aptitude. When both
learning style and verbal comprehension aptitude variables were
pitted against each other in multiple regressions to predict learning

Table 7
Coefficients for the Significant Predictor Variables Entered into
the Multiple Regression Model for Learning From Audiobook
and E-Text at Time 2, as Described in Research Question 2

Variable

B

SEB

(cid:8)

R

R2

n

Audiobook

Comprehension
Constant
Listening aptitude
Reading aptitude

E-text

Comprehension
Constant
Listening aptitude

2.65
1.21
0.78

13.77
1.05

4.41
0.31
0.34

3.42
0.23

.55(cid:2)
.33(cid:2)(cid:2)

(cid:2)(cid:2)
.66(cid:2)(cid:2)

.76

.57

30

.66

.43

40

Note. The following predictor variables were entered into the model for
audiobook and e-text learning: listening aptitude; reading aptitude; differ-
ence between listening and reading aptitude; Building Excellence (BE)
auditory learning style score; BE visual word learning style score; and the
difference between BE auditory and BE visual word score. Only the
variables listed above made significant contributions to the model. Shown
are the coefficients (B), the standard error of the coefficients (SEB), as well
as standardized coefficient ((cid:8)), and the correlation. N (cid:2) 30 (audiobook);
N (cid:2) 30 (e-text).
(cid:2) p (cid:4) .05.

(cid:2)(cid:2) p (cid:4) .01.

via either digital audiobook or e-text, only the aptitude variables
accounted for a significant amount of variance in learning. When
only learning style variables were entered into these multiple
regression analyses, they failed to account for a significant amount
of variance in learning. Thus, regardless of scoring method used
(categorical or continuous), the results from Research Question 2
failed to find a significant interaction between learning style pref-
erences (auditory, visual word) and instructional method (digital
audiobook, e-text) on learning or retention of information from a
nonfiction text.

General Discussion

According to Pashler et al.’s (2008) recent review of the learn-
ing styles literature, there is widespread belief among educators
and the general public alike that individuals learn better when they
are presented instruction in the modality that capitalizes on their
learning style preference. Pashler et al. (2008) focused on the
extent to which auditory and visual learning style preferences
influence verbal comprehension. Specifically, they focused on the
meshing hypothesis that proposes that individuals with a visual
learning style preference will learn more when information is
presented to them in a written format, and conversely, those with
an auditory learning style preference will learn more when instruc-
tion is presented to them in a listening format. They also pointed
out that the meshing hypothesis may have led to the belief that
learning style preferences and learning aptitudes for verbal com-
prehension are similar constructs. Their review of the literature led
them to conclude, however, that there is little empirical evidence to
support a direct relationship between learning style preferences
(auditory, visual) and either (a) verbal comprehension aptitude
(listening vs. reading) or (b) differential learning outcomes based
on different modes of instruction (e.g., audiobook vs. e-text).
However, they also concluded that the definitive study had not
been conducted, and therefore, they prescribed a detailed roadmap
for the experimental methodology that would be needed to address
these important issues empirically as well as explicit examples of

76

ROGOWSKY, CALHOUN, AND TALLAL

the patterns of data that would either support or refute the meshing
hypothesis.

We conducted an investigation of the meshing hypothesis with
college-educated adults following the research methods laid out by
Pashler et al. (2008) to address two research questions. In Research
Question 1, we used these methods to assess the extent to which an
individual’s learning style preference (auditory, visual word) was
consistent with his or her learning aptitude for verbal comprehen-
sion (listening, reading). In Research Question 2, we used these
methods to assess the extent to which an individual’s learning style
preference (auditory, visual-word) differentially affected how
much they would learn and retain from nonfiction text presented
using two different modes of instruction (digital audiobook,
e-text).

Results from Research Question 1 showed that differences in
preferred learning style (auditory, visual word) were not found to
significantly predict differences in learning aptitude (listening vs.
reading comprehension). That is, there were no statistically signif-
icant results that showed that individuals with stronger auditory
learning style preferences had higher listening comprehension
aptitude than reading aptitude or, conversely, that individuals with
stronger visual word learning style preferences had higher reading
than listening aptitude. Instead, participants classified with a pre-
ferred visual word learning style outperformed those classified as
having a preferred auditory learning style on both the listening and
reading comprehension aptitude tests. These results show that
learning style preference and aptitude are not comparable con-
structs. Thus, the results from Research Question 1 failed to
provide statistically significant support for the meshing hypothesis,
at least as it pertains to the relationship between learning style
preference (auditory, visual word) and verbal comprehension ap-
titude (listening, reading), respectively.

Similar to the results from Research Question 1, the results from
Research Question 2 also failed to provide statistically significant
empirical evidence supporting the meshing hypothesis, either for
immediate learning or long-term retention of information pre-
sented via two different modes of instruction (audiobook, e-text).
Regardless of whether categorical or continuous measures of
learning styles were used or which method of analysis (ANOVA,
simple correlations, multiple regression analyses) was chosen,
there were no significant findings that showed that providing
instruction to individuals in a mode that meshed with their pre-
ferred learning style resulted in better learning or retention of
information compared with instructing them in their nonpreferred
mode.

In conclusion, at least for verbal comprehension, no statistically
significant evidence was found in this investigation to support the
construct (a) that learning style is equivalent to learning aptitude or
(b) that providing instruction in the modality that meshes with an
individual’s preferred learning style will result in significantly
better learning or retention than presenting the same instruction in
an individual’s nonpreferred learning style.

Overall Limitations of the Study

One potential limitation in interpreting the results of Research
Question 1 was that the L–AT and R–AT proved not to be matched
for difficulty. Both the auditory and the visual word learning style
preference groups scored higher on the listening than on the

reading comprehension aptitude test. This could be an indication
that the listening version of the test was easier than the written
version. We pointed out that while equivalent scores on the L–AT
and the R–AT would have been more ideal, it is the pattern of the
results, rather than the absolute values, that is critical in addressing
the meshing hypothesis. That is, the main question of interest is
whether there is a differential pattern of results for participants
with an auditory compared with a visual word learning style
preference in respect to listening compared with reading aptitude,
and the analyses showed that there was not. The results from
Research Question 2 also addressed this issue. Recall that in this
case there was no significant main effect of condition (audiobook,
e-text) on performance on the Unbroken comprehension test.
There was also no significant interaction found between learning
style preference and instructional condition. This provides further
evidence that the failure to find significant support for the meshing
hypothesis in Research Question 1 was not likely due to differ-
ences in listening versus reading test difficulty.

A second limitation of the study discussed for Research Ques-
tion 1 pertained to the fact that regardless of mode of instruction,
comprehension was assessed using written questions only. The
same limitation also applies to Research Question 2. We consid-
ered that holding the format of the assessment constant would
allow only one variable (in this case, mode of instruction) to be
varied within the study. A written format was chosen over a
listening format because this is consistent with how most tests are
given. However, it could be argued that using the same (written)
format for the assessment of learning may have favored those
individuals who had a stronger visual learning style preference
and, thus, masked evidence supporting the meshing hypothesis.
Indeed, it was found in both Research Questions 1 and 2 that
participants with a visual word learning style preference performed
significantly better than those with an auditory learning style
preference on both the listening and reading comprehension tests,
both of which were assessed by written questions. However, it also
should be recalled that both learning style preference groups
performed better on the listening aptitude test than the reading
aptitude test in Research Question 1, even though both were
assessed with written questions. Regardless of these potential
limitations to the study design, it should be kept in mind that the
critical test of the meshing hypothesis rests in finding a significant
interaction between learning style preference and either aptitude
(Research Question 1) or learning based on mode of instruction
(Research Question 2). This was not found in either case. None-
theless, it may be important in future studies to determine if the
meshing hypothesis may be supported if both modes of instruction
as well as assessment measures of aptitude or learning are given in
both a listening and a written format.

Participants in this study were college-educated adults, and
therefore, the results can only be generalized to similar populations
with well-developed listening and reading comprehension skills. It
will be particularly important for future research to repeat this
same study with children of different ages who are in the process
of developing reading skills to determine the extent to which mode
of instruction, learning aptitude, and learning style preference may
affect individual differences in learning outcomes at different
stages during the development of language and literacy skills. It
would also be important to determine longitudinally the extent to
which mode of instruction or learning styles influence literacy

MATCHING LEARNING STYLE TO INSTRUCTIONAL CONDITION

77

outcomes when instruction is provided over a longer period of
time.

This research focused narrowly on verbal comprehension skills
and the extent to which learning differed when instruction is
presented via an audiobook compared with e-text. While there are
many different schemes for classifying individual learning styles,
we used only one learning style inventory (the Rundle and Dunn
Building Excellence Inventory) and within that inventory focused
only on auditory and visual word learning styles. Thus, the degree
to which the results of this study generalize to other disciplines or
other learning styles cannot be established by this study. Further-
more, instruction used in this study was given only one time and
relied on participants learning information from the preface and
one chapter in a nonfiction book. The extent to which the results
of this study can be generalized to other forms of instruction,
longer durations of instruction, and other types of material cannot
be established.

In Research Question 2, the sample size was substantially re-
duced by the random placement of participants into different
instructional conditions (audiobook, e-text) and because of the
categorical analyses. Therefore, for several of the analyses con-
cerned with finding relations among individual differences in
learning style preferences or aptitudes and mode of instruction, the
lack of statistical significance may be influenced by a lack of
power due to a modest sample size. Nonetheless, when the results
from both Research Question 1, which included a much larger
sample size (N (cid:2) 121) and Research Question 2 (n (cid:2) 61) are
considered in their entirety, they consistently fail to provide any
empirical evidence that suggests individuals will learn signifi-
cantly better when they are provided instruction in a mode that
meshes with their preferred or stronger learning style than in a
mode that does not.

Conclusion

The American education system as well as the general public
has come to believe that optimal learning occurs if individuals are
taught in their preferred learning style. Dekker et al. (2012) sur-
veyed 242 primary and secondary school teachers from the United
Kingdom (n (cid:2) 137) and the Netherlands (n (cid:2) 105) who were
enthusiastic about applying neuroscientific findings into their in-
struction. It was assumed that this population, given their high
level of interest, would be current on effective research-based
practices. The participants were given statements and were asked
if the statements were “correct,” “incorrect,” or “do not know.”
Results showed that 93% of teachers from the United Kingdom
and 96% of teachers from the Netherlands answered “correct” to
the statement: “Individuals learn better when they receive infor-
mation in their preferred learning style (e.g., auditory, visual,
kinesthetic).” The results of this study demonstrate how pervasive
the misinformation of learning styles is in everyday classroom
practice around the world.

The idea of teaching to an individual’s learning style is attrac-
tive. According to learning styles theory, if an individual is strug-
gling to learn new material, it is possible that his or her poor
performance results from not being taught in a mode that meshes
with the individual’s preferred learning style. Thus, educators and
professional development leaders spend time and resources assess-
ing their students’ learning style and developing instruction to

specifically match a student’s preferred learning styles. It is com-
mon for lesson plans to include a section in which teachers are
asked to explain how they will accommodate the different learning
styles of students in their classroom. Therefore, the findings from
this study have considerable relevance for educational theory and
practice.

The main finding from Research Questions 1 and 2 that may
have a substantial influence on current educational practice is that
when participants were categorized by their preferred learning
style, either auditory or visual word, those who were classified as
visual word learners performed better, compared with auditory
learners, on verbal comprehension measures. In other words, vi-
sual word learners scored higher than auditory learners on both the
reading and the listening aptitude tests and the Unbroken compre-
hension tests. Therefore, and counter to current educational beliefs
and practices, educators may actually be doing a disservice to
auditory learners by continually accommodating their auditory
learning style preference by providing them instruction that
meshes with their auditory learning style, rather than focusing on
strengthening their visual word skills. It is important to keep in
mind that most testing, from state standardized education assess-
ments to college admission tests, is presented in a written word
format only. Thus, it is important to give students as much expe-
rience with written material as possible to help them build these
skills, regardless of their preferred learning style. Rather than
continually accommodating auditory learners’ preference with in-
creased instruction in an auditory format, auditory learners might
benefit more from receiving instruction that specifically targets
and strengthens their visual word skills.

In a review of the learning styles literature, Pashler et al. (2008)
did not find empirical support to justify matching instruction to
learning style. He and his collaborators brought to light several
pressing concerns. First, too often individuals allow their intuitions
to shape their beliefs. We base our educational practice on trial and
error, or we are complicit in always doing what has always been
done. Changing the minds of teachers and teacher educators with
regards to learning styles is no small feat. Pashler et al. (2008)
stated, “If education is to be transformed into an evidence-based
field, it is important not only to identify teaching techniques that
have experimental support but also to identify widely held beliefs
that affect the choices made by educational practitioners that lack
empirical support” (p. 117). The goal of this study was to provide
more empirical evidence to guide educational practitioners in
making sound judgments pertaining to whether their students will
or will not benefit from receiving instruction that meshes with their
preferred learning style or aptitude. In the current study, we failed
to find any statistically significant, empirical support for tailoring
instructional methods to an individual’s learning style.

References

Cassidy, S. (2004). Learning styles: An overview of theories, models, and
measures. Educational Psychology, 24, 419 – 444. doi.http://dx.doi.org/
10.1080/0144341042000228834.

Coffield, F., Moseley, D., Hall, E., & Ecclestone, K. (2004). Learning styles and
pedagogy in post-16 learning: A systematic and critical review. London, Eng-
land: Learning & Skills Research Centre. Retrieved from http://lerenleren
.nu/bronnen/Learning%20styles%20by%20Coffield%20e.a..pdf

Dekker, S., Lee, N. C., Howard-Jones, P., & Jolles, J. (2012). Neuromyths
in education: Prevalence and predictors of misconceptions among teach-

78

ROGOWSKY, CALHOUN, AND TALLAL

ers. Frontiers in Psychology: Educational Psychology, 429, 1– 8. doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00429

Dunn, R., Dunn, K., & Price, G. E. (1989). Learning Styles Inventory.

Lawrence, KS: Price Systems.

Gregorc, A. F. (1982). Gregorc Style Delineator: Development, technical,

and administration manual. Maynard, MA: Gabriel Systems.

Herrmann, N. (1996). The whole brain business book. New York, NY:

McGraw–Hill.

Kolb, D. (1985). Learning Style Inventory. Boston, MA: McBer.
Kozhevnikov, M. (2007). Cognitive styles in the context of modern psy-
chology: Toward an integrated framework of cognitive style. Psycho-
logical Bulletin, 133, 464 – 481. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.133.3.464

Pashler, H., McDaniel, M., Rohrer, D., & Bjork, R. (2008). Learning styles:
Concepts and evidence. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 9,
105–119. Retrieved from http://psi.sagepub.com/content/9/3/105.abstract

Rundle, S., & Dunn, R. (2010). Learning styles: Online learning style
assessments and community. Retrieved from http://www.learningstyles
.net

Sternberg, R. J., Grigorenko, E. L., & Zhang, L. (2008). Styles of learning
and thinking matter in instruction and assessment. Perspectives on
Psychological Science, 3, 486 –506. doi:10.1111/j.1745-6924.2008
.00095.x

Weiderholt, J. L., & Bryant, B. R. (2000). Gray Oral Reading Test (4th

ed.). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.

Received August 21, 2013
Revision received June 11, 2014

Accepted June 15, 2014 (cid:2)

Members of Underrepresented Groups:
Reviewers for Journal Manuscripts Wanted

If you are interested in reviewing manuscripts for APA journals, the APA Publications and
Communications Board would like to invite your participation. Manuscript reviewers are vital to the
publications process. As a reviewer, you would gain valuable experience in publishing. The P&C
Board is particularly interested in encouraging members of underrepresented groups to participate
more in this process.

If you are interested in reviewing manuscripts, please write APA Journals at Reviewers@apa.org.
Please note the following important points:

• To be selected as a reviewer, you must have published articles in peer-reviewed journals. The
experience of publishing provides a reviewer with the basis for preparing a thorough, objective
review.

• To be selected, it is critical to be a regular reader of the five to six empirical journals that are most
central to the area or journal for which you would like to review. Current knowledge of recently
published research provides a reviewer with the knowledge base to evaluate a new submission
within the context of existing research.

• To select the appropriate reviewers for each manuscript, the editor needs detailed information.
Please include with your letter your vita. In the letter, please identify which APA journal(s) you
are interested in, and describe your area of expertise. Be as specific as possible. For example,
“social psychology” is not sufficient—you would need to specify “social cognition” or “attitude
change” as well.

• Reviewing a manuscript takes time (1– 4 hours per manuscript reviewed). If you are selected to
review a manuscript, be prepared to invest the necessary time to evaluate the manuscript
thoroughly.

APA now has an online video course that provides guidance in reviewing manuscripts. To learn
more about the course and to access the video, visit http://www.apa.org/pubs/authors/review-
manuscript-ce-video.aspx.

