Collecting PyPDF2
  Downloading pypdf2-3.0.1-py3-none-any.whl.metadata (6.8 kB)
Downloading pypdf2-3.0.1-py3-none-any.whl (232 kB)
Installing collected packages: PyPDF2
Successfully installed PyPDF2-3.0.1
Collecting pdfplumber
  Downloading pdfplumber-0.11.9-py3-none-any.whl.metadata (43 kB)
Collecting pdfminer.six==20251230 (from pdfplumber)
  Downloading pdfminer_six-20251230-py3-none-any.whl.metadata (4.3 kB)
Requirement already satisfied: Pillow>=9.1 in c:\users\ken\drkenreid.github.io\.venv\lib\site-packages (from pdfplumber) (12.2.0)
Collecting pypdfium2>=4.18.0 (from pdfplumber)
  Downloading pypdfium2-5.7.0-py3-none-win_amd64.whl.metadata (67 kB)
Requirement already satisfied: charset-normalizer>=2.0.0 in c:\users\ken\drkenreid.github.io\.venv\lib\site-packages (from pdfminer.six==20251230->pdfplumber) (3.4.7)
Requirement already satisfied: cryptography>=36.0.0 in c:\users\ken\drkenreid.github.io\.venv\lib\site-packages (from pdfminer.six==20251230->pdfplumber) (46.0.7)
Requirement already satisfied: cffi>=2.0.0 in c:\users\ken\drkenreid.github.io\.venv\lib\site-packages (from cryptography>=36.0.0->pdfminer.six==20251230->pdfplumber) (2.0.0)
Requirement already satisfied: pycparser in c:\users\ken\drkenreid.github.io\.venv\lib\site-packages (from cffi>=2.0.0->cryptography>=36.0.0->pdfminer.six==20251230->pdfplumber) (3.0)
Downloading pdfplumber-0.11.9-py3-none-any.whl (60 kB)
Downloading pdfminer_six-20251230-py3-none-any.whl (6.6 MB)
   ---------------------------------------- 6.6/6.6 MB 44.6 MB/s  0:00:00
Downloading pypdfium2-5.7.0-py3-none-win_amd64.whl (3.7 MB)
   ---------------------------------------- 3.7/3.7 MB 60.0 MB/s  0:00:00
Installing collected packages: pypdfium2, pdfminer.six, pdfplumber
  Attempting uninstall: pdfminer.six
    Found existing installation: pdfminer.six 20260107
    Uninstalling pdfminer.six-20260107:
      Successfully uninstalled pdfminer.six-20260107

Successfully installed pdfminer.six-20251230 pdfplumber-0.11.9 pypdfium2-5.7.0
Basic Science and Clinical Application of the Contrast Avoidance
Model in Generalized Anxiety Disorder
Michelle G. Newman Sandra J. Llera
ThePennsylvaniaStateUniversity TowsonUniversity
Thane M. Erickson Amy Przeworski
SeattlePacificUniversity CaseWesternReserveUniversity
TheContrastAvoidancemodel(Newman&Llera,2011)proposesthatindividualswith
generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) are excessively sensitive to negative emotional
shifts(contrasts)inresponsetounpleasantevents,andthusrecruitastateofsustained
intrapersonal negativity via worry as a defensive stance against such shifting states.
Herewereviewthebasicsciencerelatedtoenvironmental,psychological,andbiolog-
icalriskfactorsinthedevelopmentofsuchemotionalsensitivitiesinGAD,andpresent
evidence supporting the position that worry and maladaptive interpersonal styles are
employedasdefensivestrategiestoprotectagainstemotionalcontrasts.Wepresent2
case examples to elucidate these issues, as well as to introduce specific clinical
recommendations for targeting and treating these behaviors. Suggestions for future
avenuesofresearcharealsodiscussed.
Keywords:experientialavoidance,emotion,generalizedanxietydisorder,modelsofGAD
Our understanding of generalized anxiety avoidashiftfromaneutralorpositiveaffective
disorder(GAD)hasevolvedconsiderablyinthe state to a negative affective state, which we
decadessinceitwasintroducedasastand-alone defineasanegativeemotionalcontrast.Below,
disorder; however, the literature holds substan- we describe the evidence consistent with this
tialinconsistenciesregardingtheroleofworry, newmodelwithrespecttoetiology,reactivityto
the principal symptom of GAD. In particular, stress, attempts to self-regulate, and interper-
severaltheorieshavepositedthatworryisused sonal behaviors of individuals with GAD. We
as a means to avoid distressing affect (e.g., also illustrate the clinical implications of this
Newman, Castonguay, Borkovec, & Molnar, theory through two clinical vignettes.
2004). However, basic research has failed to
supportthesetheoriesconsistently.Inresponse, Overview of GAD
Newman and Llera (2011) introduced a data-
driven theory, the Contrast Avoidance model, GAD is primarily defined by its core symp-
whichpositsthatworryisessentiallyameansto tom of chronic and uncontrollable worry about
anumberoftopicsmostofthedaynearlyevery
day for at least 6 months. Associated physical
symptomsincludefatigue,muscletension,rest-
Michelle G. Newman, Department of Psychology and lessness, difficulty sleeping, feeling on edge,
Psychiatry, The Pennsylvania State University; Sandra J. irritability, difficulty concentrating, and gastro-
Llera, Department of Psychology, Towson University;
intestinalsymptoms.Suchworrycausesatleast
Thane M. Erickson, Department of Psychology, Seattle
Pacific University; Amy Przeworski, Department of Psy- moderatedistressorimpairment.LifetimeGAD
chology,CaseWesternReserveUniversity. prevalence has been estimated to be about
Correspondence concerning this article should be ad- 14.2%withpast-yearprevalenceof4.2%(Mof-
dressed to Michelle G. Newman, Department of Psychol-
fitt et al., 2010).
ogy,ThePennsylvaniaStateUniversity,371MooreBuild-
Although GAD may be viewed as one of
ing,UniversityPark,PA16803-3103.E-mail:mgn1@psu.
edu the less debilitating diagnoses, studies show
.srehsilbupdeillastifoenoronoitaicossAlacigolohcysPnaciremAehtybdethgirypocsitnemucodsihT
.yldaorbdetanimessidebottonsidnaresulaudividniehtfoesulanosrepehtrofylelosdednetnisielcitrasihT
JournalofPsychotherapyIntegration ©2014AmericanPsychologicalAssociation
2014,Vol.24,No.3,155–167 1053-0479/14/$12.00 http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0037510
155
.devreser
era
,seigolonhcet
ralimis
dna
,gniniart
IA
,gninim
atad
dna
txet
rof
gnidulcni
,sthgir
llA
156 NEWMAN,LLERA,ERICKSON,ANDPRZEWORSKI
repeatedly that it is equally distressing and Risk Factors in the Development of
impairing when compared to major depres- Emotional Problems in GAD
sion (Kessler et al., 2002; Sanderson & An-
drews, 2002). Comorbid disorders occur in Genetics, Neurobiology, and
about 60% of those with GAD and are asso- Emotional Reactivity
ciated with even greater disability and inter-
ference as well as lower rates of remission In a review of genetic research conducted
andhigherratesofrelapse(Bruceetal.,2005; using twins and families, studies point to a
Newman, Przeworski, Fisher, & Borkovec, greater-than-chancegeneticinfluenceinthede-
2010).Moreover,roleimpairmentforGADis velopmentofGAD(Schienle,Hettema,Cáceda,
comparable to what has been reported for &Nemeroff,2011).IndividualswithGADver-
individuals with chronic medical conditions susthosewithoutthedisorderaremorelikelyto
(e.g.,autoimmunedisease,arthritis;Alonsoet havefirst-degreerelativeswithGAD,andiden-
al., 2011; Kessler, Greenberg, Mickelson, tical twins have higher concordance rates of
GAD than fraternal twins. Several factors have
Meneades, & Wang, 2001) and greater than
beenimplicatedinthisresearch,oneofwhichis
what has been reported for certain chronic
the heritable personality trait of neuroticism
physicaldisorders(backorneckpain,chronic
(high negative emotionality) which has been
pain, heart disease, high blood pressure, and
found to account for a large amount of the
ulcers; Lee et al., 2009). GAD is also an
geneticvarianceinGAD(Hettema,Neale,My-
independentriskfactorforcoronaryheartdis-
ers, Prescott, & Kendler, 2006). Another factor
easeandprematuremortality(Barger&Syde-
is increased activity in the amygdala (a brain
man, 2005; Martens et al., 2010; Todaro,
structure associated with fear responding), as
Shen, Raffa, Tilkemeier, & Niaura, 2007).
genetic risk for GAD predicts increased meta-
Thus, effective detection, prevention, and
bolic activity in this brain area (Hettema et al.,
treatment are vitally important. It is also im-
2012). Together, these factors implicate a pos-
portant to note that although cognitive– sible underlying vulnerability toward negative
behavioral therapy (CBT) for GAD is effica-
emotionality in those with GAD.
cious, it does not work for everyone;
Supporting genetic findings, neurobiological
therefore, greater understanding of this disor-
and physiological research on individuals with
der may improve treatment.
GAD has identified vulnerabilities in terms of
Individuals with GAD often report that
boththecentralandperipheralnervoussystem.
they have a “love-hate” relationship with
Studies of the brain have revealed amygdalar
worry. On the one hand, these individuals
differences in adults with GAD, including in-
view worry as helpful to them with respect to
creased gray matter (Schienle, Ebner, & Scha-
problem-solving, motivation, preparation for
fer, 2011) and higher resting metabolic activity
possiblecatastrophicoutcomes,andevenasa
levels(Hettemaetal.,2012)relativetononanx-
way to feel emotionally protected in the case ious controls, suggesting a potential for hyper-
ofsuchoutcomes.Ontheotherhand,asnoted
active fear responding. In addition, those with
above, chronic worry leads to a number of GAD have higher resting sympathetic (SNS)
significant physical, mental, and health- and lower parasympathetic nervous system
related problems. However, given that worry (PNS)activityrelativetocontrols(e.g.,Pruneti,
may be viewed as helpful, it is important to Lento, Fante, Carrozzo, & Fontana, 2010). To-
determine if and how worry functions in this gether, these findings point to higher resting
manner and to address any positive beliefs levels of emotional arousal with strong impli-
about worry at the outset of treatment. To cations for emotional overactivity. In other
illustratetheroleofworryasdelineatedinthe words, these studies show that people with
ContrastAvoidancemodel,thefollowingsec- GAD are at risk for powerful emotional reac-
tionreviewsbasicresearchfindingsthatpoint tions that may feel difficult to tolerate.
to extreme discomfort with sharp shifts in Correspondingly, many studies have linked
emotional states (or emotional contrasts), GAD to emotional hyperreactivity. Subjec-
which may reinforce the use of worry as a tively, both analogue and treatment-seeking
means to avoid such contrasts. participants with GAD report that their emo-
.srehsilbupdeillastifoenoronoitaicossAlacigolohcysPnaciremAehtybdethgirypocsitnemucodsihT
.yldaorbdetanimessidebottonsidnaresulaudividniehtfoesulanosrepehtrofylelosdednetnisielcitrasihT
.devreser
era
,seigolonhcet
ralimis
dna
,gniniart
IA
,gninim
atad
dna
txet
rof
gnidulcni
,sthgir
llA
CONTRASTAVOIDANCEMODELINGAD 157
tionsfeelmoreintenseandtheyfinditharderto lack,2002),rape(Steketee&Foa,1987),com-
recover from negative emotions than do those bat (Centers for Disease Control Vietnam Ex-
without GAD (Mennin, Heimberg, Turk, & perienceStudy,1988),anddisaster(Shoreetal.,
Fresco, 2005; Turk et al., 2005). Behaviorally, 1986). In one study, 52% of treatment-seeking
they are rated as more reactive to others’ neg- individuals with GAD reported experiencing a
ative emotions in social interactions (Erickson potentially traumatizing event, a number that
& Newman, 2007). On a neurological level, greatly exceeded the number of nonanxious in-
participants with GAD demonstrate hyperre- dividuals who reported a potentially traumatiz-
sponsivityoftheamygdalatotheanticipationof ing event (21%; Roemer, Molina, & Borkovec,
a negative event (Nitschke et al., 2009; Yassa, 1997).
Hazlett, Stark, & Hoehn-Saric, 2012). Thus, Childhood trauma in individuals who do not
individuals with GAD also report feeling more havePTSDisassociatedwithchronicincreased
threatened by and less in control of their emo- autonomic and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
tions relative to both nonanxious controls and axis activation (Heim et al., 2000), which may
persons with social anxiety disorder (Llera & be related to chronic stress and anxiety. It may
Newman, 2010; Turk, Heimberg, Luterek, bethatchronicandone-timestressfullifeevents
Mennin, & Fresco, 2005). change people’s world-views about life being
Insum,researchonaffectivefactorspointsto predictable and good things happening to good
a vulnerability to emotional hyperreactivity in people. This perspective may contribute to the
thosewithGAD.Iftheseindividualsexperience development of discomfort with negative emo-
negative events and subsequent emotional hy- tionalcontrastsasitmayleadtohypervigilance
perresponding, this may be associated with to potential future negative events and the ac-
greater sensitivity to negative emotional con- companying affective shifts.
trasts and attempts to avoid such contrasts.
Attachment and Parenting Style
Temperament
Perceived parental rejection (Brown & Whi-
Temperamentconsistsofinnate,earlydiffer-
teside, 2008; Cassidy, Lichtenstein-Phelps, Si-
ences in biological, behavioral, and emotional
brava, Thomas, & Borkovec, 2009), parental
responsiveness to environmental stimuli and is
coldness (Cassidy et al., 2009), harsh parental
thoughttocontributetolateremotionregulation
discipline, parenting characterized by strict
difficulties and psychopathology, such as anxi-
rules and high expectations (Shanahan, Cope-
ety(Rothbart,2007).Onetypeoftemperament,
land, Costello, & Angold, 2008), and parental
behavioral inhibition, is characterized by re-
overprotection (Beesdo, Pine, Lieb, &
straint, distress, low threshold to novelty, and
Wittchen, 2010; Nordahl et al., 2010) are asso-
avoidance when exposed to novel stimuli (Ka-
ciated with offspring GAD and worry. All of
gan & Snidman, 1999). It is believed that be-
these parenting styles may contribute to fre-
haviorally inhibited children have increased
quent and unpredictable moments of negative
SNS activity or decreased PNS activity that
affect in response to parent–child interactions.
contributes to this sensitivity and the resulting
GAD has also been associated with maternal
arousal and negative affective states when ex-
role-reversal and enmeshment (Cassidy et al.,
posedtonovelstimuli.Thismayleadbehavior-
2009).Role-reversalputsachildintheposition
allyinhibitedchildrentoexperienceshiftsfrom
of being the adult, providing comfort to the
euthymic/positive to negative states as being
parent and being responsible for the parent’s
extreme, distressing, and difficult to control.
welfare.Thislevelofresponsibilitymayexceed
Environment children’sresourcesandunderminetheirdevel-
opment, thereby leading them to experience
GAD is associated with the experience of greaterfrequencyofsharplyincreasednegative
negativelifeevents(Nordahl,Wells,Olsson,& affect and difficulties in regulating their emo-
Bjerkeset, 2010), maltreatment (Moffitt et al., tion.
2007),loss(Kendler,Hettema,Butera,Gardner, Finally, parental psychological control has
&Prescott,2003),childhoodsexualorphysical alsobeenassociatedwithGADsymptoms(Wi-
abuse (Safren, Gershuny, Marzol, Otto, & Pol- jsbroek,HaleIii,Raaijmakers,&Meeus,2011).
.srehsilbupdeillastifoenoronoitaicossAlacigolohcysPnaciremAehtybdethgirypocsitnemucodsihT
.yldaorbdetanimessidebottonsidnaresulaudividniehtfoesulanosrepehtrofylelosdednetnisielcitrasihT
.devreser
era
,seigolonhcet
ralimis
dna
,gniniart
IA
,gninim
atad
dna
txet
rof
gnidulcni
,sthgir
llA
158 NEWMAN,LLERA,ERICKSON,ANDPRZEWORSKI
Psychological control is characterized by par- enced as overwhelming and out of control. In
entsinvalidatingtheirchild’semotionalexperi- fact,acommonthemeforourclientswithGAD
enceandattemptingtochangethechild’semo- is a desire to gain control over their emotions.
tions through love withdrawal, isolation, and A recent theory in the literature was that
shaming. Such parental behaviors may lead individualswithGADtriedtoavoidorsuppress
childrentoexperiencedifficultyinrecognizing, their emotions by engaging in chronic worry
expressing, and regulating their emotions, (e.g., Newman et al., 2004). This theory was
thereby leading children to experience hyper- based on studies showing that people did not
vigilancetotheiremotionalshiftsanddifficulty demonstrate strong increases in their negative
inregulatingtheiremotionsinordertoreturnto emotion in response to a negative stimulus if
a neutral state. theyhadjustbeenengagedinworry(e.g.,Bork-
Parenting behaviors are believed to contrib- ovec & Hu, 1990). However, contrary to the
ute to internal mental representations of inter- view that worry leads to emotional avoidance,
personal dynamics through attachment styles. anabundanceofstudiesshowsthatworryactu-
Attachmentisthoughttolaythefoundationfor ally creates and prolongs heightened negative
affect regulation (Bowlby, 1973) and later in- affect in people with and without GAD (see
terpersonal behaviors. Two anxious and inse- Newman&Llera,2011;Newman,Llera,Erick-
cure attachment styles have been associated son, Przeworski, & Castonguay, 2013 for a
with GAD and worry: anxious-avoidance and complete review).
ambivalent/resistantstyles(Mickelson,Kessler, Inordertotrytounderstandwhypeoplewith
& Shaver, 1997; Muris, Meesters, van Melick, GAD would a) view worry positively and b)
& Zwambag, 2001). Anxious-avoidant infants continuetoengageinchronicworrydespitethe
were rejected by their mothers and avoided impactworryhasonprolongingnegativeaffect,
them upon reunion. Ambivalent/resistant in- Newman and Llera (2011; see also Newman et
fants had inconsistent or intrusive parents lead- al., 2013) proposed the Contrast Avoidance
ing infants to respond with anger, resistance, model to describe the emotional dysregulation
anxiety, and ambivalent behavior upon a re- underlying worry maintenance. This model
union.Bothparentalrejectionandinconsistency states that individuals with GAD have devel-
in parental responses, as well as accompanying oped heightened sensitivity to negative emo-
affective shifts, may cause these children to tional contrasts, and rather than attempting to
become overly sensitive to the affective fluctu- avoid or suppress their emotions, they use
ationsthattheyexperienceinresponsetointer- worry to actively recruit a state of heightened
actionwithparents.Insum,avarietyofparent– andsustainednegativeemotionasawaytofeel
child interactions may contribute to the emotionally prepared for any possible negative
development of an aversion to emotional con- event.Thatis,theyprefertomaintainastateof
trast. vigilance and anxiety through worry so that if
something bad does happen, they will be less
Overview of the Contrast Avoidance Model likely to experience a sharp increase in their
negative emotions. This is referred to as avoid-
As demonstrated in the aforementioned re- anceofa“negativeemotionalcontrast”because
search, individuals with GAD tend to experi- ifpeoplearealreadyfeelingupset,theyexperi-
encestrongemotionalreactivitytonegativelife encelessofashift(orcontrast)inthevalenceof
events, along with greater emotional sensitivity their emotion if their feared outcome happens
and difficulty in regulating emotions. Coupled than if they had been feeling calm or relaxed.
with these sensitivities, individuals with GAD ForthosewithGAD,chronicworrymayleadto
may also have increased risk factors such as feeling more in control of emotions and less
behaviorally inhibited temperament, negative likely to be caught off-guard (albeit with the
environmental experiences, troubling parental consequence of a chronically negative emo-
interactions,andcorrespondinginsecureattach- tionalbaseline).Thishelpstoexplainpriorfind-
mentstyles.Together,thesevulnerabilitiesmay ings that worrying before a negative event pre-
lead an individual to develop extreme sensitiv- vents strong increases in negative emotion,
itytosuddenshiftsfromneutral/positivetoneg- because those who are worried are already ex-
ative emotional states, which may be experi- periencing negative emotion.
.srehsilbupdeillastifoenoronoitaicossAlacigolohcysPnaciremAehtybdethgirypocsitnemucodsihT
.yldaorbdetanimessidebottonsidnaresulaudividniehtfoesulanosrepehtrofylelosdednetnisielcitrasihT
.devreser
era
,seigolonhcet
ralimis
dna
,gniniart
IA
,gninim
atad
dna
txet
rof
gnidulcni
,sthgir
llA
CONTRASTAVOIDANCEMODELINGAD 159
Evidence Supporting and Elaborating on contrast,itislikelythatpeoplewithGADenjoy
the Contrast Avoidance Model thisexperienceand,asnoted,itcreatesavicious
cycle whereby chronic worry is negatively re-
The Contrast Avoidance model suggests that inforced.
individualswithGADuseworryasadefensive At the same time, the Contrast Avoidance
maneuvertoavoidtheemotionalcontrastexpe- modelalsopredictsthatwhenpeoplewithGAD
rience associated with reactivity to life’s stres- doexperienceasharpincreaseintheirnegative
sors. This is based on research showing that emotion, this would prompt them to begin to
worryleadstoheightenednegativeemotionality worry as a means to maintain their negative
that is sustained across negative emotional ex- emotion as an emotion regulation strategy. In
posures in both GAD and nonanxious groups other words, in addition to using worry defen-
(e.g., Llera & Newman, 2010; Llera & New- sivelytopreventthelikelihoodofexperiencing
man, 2014). Additional findings showed that an emotional contrast, this model predicts that
worry (compared to relaxation and neutral in- theseindividualsmightalsouseworrytomain-
ductions)ledtostrongernegativeemotions,but tain their negative emotionality following an
alsoledtolessofanemotionalshiftinresponse emotional contrast experience as a means to
to a subsequent negative emotional film clip in prevent additional negative emotional contrast
individuals with and without GAD (Llera & experiences(e.g.,anothersharpshiftinnegative
Newman, 2010; Llera & Newman, 2014). Im- emotions).Infact,studiesshowthatphysiolog-
portantly,allparticipantsreportedsimilarlevels icalrecoveryfromstressishamperedbyworry
ofnegativeemotionduringtheclip.Thatworry (Radstaak, Geurts, Brosschot, Cillessen, &
had the same effect for those with and without Kompier, 2011).
GAD on subsequent negative emotion supports
the causal role of worry on increased and sus- Interpersonal Behaviors and Styles
tainednegativeaffectivity.However,thosewith
GADactuallyreportedthatitwaseasiertocope In addition to using worry as a strategy for
withthenegativeemotionsassociatedwithdis- emotion regulation (avoiding negative con-
tressing films if they were already in a state of trasts),worriersandindividualswithGADcon-
worry,whereasnonanxiousparticipantsfoundit sistently demonstrate problematic social cogni-
easier to cope if they had been relaxed prior to tionandbehavior(Newman&Erickson,2010),
viewing the clips (Llera & Newman, 2014). suggesting potential roles for interpersonal
Thus, the GAD group perceived the avoidance problems in the maintenance of GAD symp-
of negative emotional contrasts via prior worry toms—and possibly even maintenance of diffi-
to be subjectively more protective than prior culty with negative contrasts. The available re-
relaxation,whereasthecontrolgroupperceived searchprovidesreasonstointegratetheContrast
the opposite. This is consistent with the Con- Avoidance model into interpersonal models of
trast Avoidance model’s explanation that those GAD.
with GAD may use the emotionally arousing Evidence of dysfunctional social cognition
properties of worry as an emotional defense comes from studies showing that interpersonal
mechanism against the experience of negative issues are the most frequent topic for worry
contrasts. (Roemeretal.,1997),andthatindividualswith
AnotherfindingbyLleraandNewman(2010, GAD self-reported heightened interpersonal
2014) was that whereas worry decreased the sensitivity (Hoehn-Saric, Hazlett, & McLeod,
likelihoodofexperiencinganegativeemotional 1993). Furthermore, individuals with GAD
contrast, worry increased the likelihood of ex- have exhibited biased attention to threatening
periencing a positive emotional contrast when faces(Mogg,Millar,&Bradley,2000)andthey
participants viewed a subsequent humorous perceived confederates as attacking or control-
clip. In other words, if people worry about a ling in a “get acquainted” interaction task (Er-
negative event, and that event does not happen ickson & Pincus, 2005), relative to controls.
or something good actually happens, they will Even after accounting for social anxiety and
experience a positive shift from negative to depressive symptoms, heightened worry pre-
neutral emotions (relief). Given that worry in- dictedperceivingothers’socialbehaviorascold
creasesthelikelihoodofexperiencingapositive (Erickson, Newman, & Abelson, 2010).
.srehsilbupdeillastifoenoronoitaicossAlacigolohcysPnaciremAehtybdethgirypocsitnemucodsihT
.yldaorbdetanimessidebottonsidnaresulaudividniehtfoesulanosrepehtrofylelosdednetnisielcitrasihT
.devreser
era
,seigolonhcet
ralimis
dna
,gniniart
IA
,gninim
atad
dna
txet
rof
gnidulcni
,sthgir
llA
160 NEWMAN,LLERA,ERICKSON,ANDPRZEWORSKI
Similarly,dysfunctionalinterpersonalbehav- iety symptoms of GAD. Integrating basic find-
ior is common in people with GAD. These ingsontheContrastAvoidancemodelofGAD
individuals self-report a wide variety of inter- and interpersonal processes in GAD may ad-
personal problems (Przeworski et al., 2011). dress this question and generate treatment ap-
Higher worry predicted both inaccuracy in es- plications. Namely, individuals with GAD may
timating one’s social impact on strangers (Er- usearangeofinterpersonalbehaviorsasaform
ickson&Newman,2007)andnegative(colder) of “regulation” to strategically avoid emotional
impacts on significant others in a mixed anx- contrasts in social interactions.
ious-depressed clinical sample (Erickson et al., Below we present two clinical cases that il-
2010). Individuals with GAD consequently lustratethemechanismsbywhichnegativecon-
have relatively fewer friends (Whisman, Shel- trastavoidancetendenciesmaydevelopandre-
don, & Goering, 2000) and more family prob- inforce the use of worry as a means to prevent
lems (Beesdo et al., 2010). Furthermore, GAD emotional shifts. Further, we also present ther-
predictsdivorceorseparation(Whisman,2007) apeutic techniques used to address these pat-
and low marital satisfaction, even accounting terns and reduce worry.
for comorbid disorders (Whisman et al., 2000).
Prospective links between interpersonal pro- GAD Client Cases
cessesandGADsymptomsorresponsetotreat-
ment suggest a potential role of interpersonal Case 1
problems in the maintenance of GAD. For in-
stance,interpersonalproblems(Crits-Christoph, Sue,a28-year-olddentalassistant,isawell-
Gibbons, Narducci, Schamberger, & Gallop, acculturated daughter of Haitian immigrants.
2005),partnerhostility(Zinbarg,Lee,&Yoon, She reports being prone to an anxious temper-
2007), and personality disorders (Ansell et al., ament and worrying her whole life, with worry
2011)predictpersistenceofGADsymptoms,as foci including concerns about extreme weather
do interpersonal problems left untreated after (e.g.,hurricanes),thehealthoffamilymembers,
CBT (Borkovec, Newman, Pincus, & Lytle, her risk of diabetes, and her chances of finding
2002). However, supportive-expressive psy- a suitable husband. Sue ascribes the develop-
chodynamic therapy to foster insight into core mentofheranxietytochildhoodexperiencesof
negative relationship patterns led to improve- living with her mother’s chronic and relapsing
ment only in some interpersonal problems diabetes-related problems; Sue reports that her
(Crits-Christoph et al., 2005). Similarly, a re- mother’s health alternated unpredictably be-
cent clinical trial augmented CBT with an In- tween “good weeks” and “bad weeks.” She
terpersonal-EmotionalProcessing(IEP)module soughtpsychotherapyseveralmonthsafterHur-
on exploration of clients’ current and past rela- ricane Sandy wrought significant damage to
tionships (including the therapeutic relation- communities in Haiti, where several members
ship), emotional processing of emotionally of her extended family reside. None was hurt
evocative interpersonal material, and learning seriously, but the economic and emotional toll
newinterpersonalandemotionregulationskills on these individuals was pronounced. Subse-
to meet one’s needs. However, it did not out- quent to this stressor, Sue reported notably in-
performCBTplussupportivelisteningoninter- creased thematic worries, muscle tension, agi-
personal and GAD outcomes (Newman et al., tation, irritability, and insomnia, as well as
2011). Thus, social processes seem to play an occasional worry-induced panic attacks and re-
important role in the perpetuation of GAD current problems in her current dating relation-
symptoms, but require additional treatment en- ship.
hancements. Sue reported that her worry developed in
The basic research to date lacks a coherent responsetotwomajorlifestressors—hermoth-
explanationofhowheterogeneousinterpersonal er’s chronic and relapsing health as a result of
problems(includingopposingstyles,e.g.,intru- diabetes, and the stress of her relatives experi-
sive [warm-dominant] vs. socially avoidant encingHurricaneSandy.Suemayhavebecome
[cold-submissive]; Przeworski et al., 2011) or oversensitive to the accompanying affective
personality problems (e.g., Dyck et al., 2001) shifts and difficulties in regulating her emo-
mightmaintaintherelativelyhomogenousanx- tional state upon periodic worsening of her
.srehsilbupdeillastifoenoronoitaicossAlacigolohcysPnaciremAehtybdethgirypocsitnemucodsihT
.yldaorbdetanimessidebottonsidnaresulaudividniehtfoesulanosrepehtrofylelosdednetnisielcitrasihT
.devreser
era
,seigolonhcet
ralimis
dna
,gniniart
IA
,gninim
atad
dna
txet
rof
gnidulcni
,sthgir
llA
CONTRASTAVOIDANCEMODELINGAD 161
mother’s condition. Therefore, Sue may have Currently, Sue reports that she finds her
learnedthatthebestwaytocopewithhermoth- worry to be distressing, but has also noted that
er’s variable health problems was to engage in it is preferable to feeling relaxed because it
chronic worry to avoid the sharp increase in helpshertofeelpreparedfor“theothershoeto
negative emotion she would otherwise experi- drop.” Sue has said that because she never
enceeverytimethingstookaturnfortheworse. knows when this could happen, she finds it
Suealsosawtheimpactofastressfullifeevent more comforting to be in a state of vigilance
onherrelativeswhosurvivedHurricaneSandy. even if this brings her mood down. Whenever
In contrast to the more chronic stress of her sheallowsherselfmomentsoffeelinggood,this
mother’s condition, this one-time and unpre- leadstoasenseofbeingemotionallyvulnerable
dictable event may have led Sue to anticipate because“Iwilljustfeelsomuchworseifsome-
that such devastating events could occur at any thing bad does happen.”
timetoherlovedones,andthereforetoprefera
chronic state of negative affect to the sudden Case 2
affective shift that she would experience if an-
other life stressor occurred. Peter is a 40-year-old White man of German
As a child, Sue frequently had to take on a Americandescent.Hepresentsfortreatmentof
caregivingrolewithherailingmother.Thisled GADsymptoms(worry,restlessness,insomnia,
Sue to experience uncomfortable periods of feeling “keyed up,” and concentration prob-
stress, discomfort, and anxiety because she did lems) as well as major depressive disorder. He
nothavetheemotionalresourcestotakeonthis reportshavingbeenvulnerabletodysphoricand
responsibility. Additionally, this relationship anxiousmoodsandworryatleastasfarbackas
wascharacterizedbyperiodsoftimewhenSue his parents’ chronic marital conflict during his
was appropriately in the child’s role and could preteen years. Peter witnessed his parents’ tu-
relyonhermother’ssupportandtimeswhenthe multuous marriage that fluctuated between
power differential shifted and Sue became the happy periods and intense arguments, often ac-
caregiver. Sue never knew which role she companied by the threat of divorce. In order to
would be in on a given day, creating chronic cope with these unpredictable negative periods
and unexpected stress. Sue was sensitized to (and potentially pending divorce), Peter began
emotional contrasts in the context of her moth- to worry about their relationship as a way to
er’s diabetes relapses, and coped via not only “stay prepared for the worst” in order to avoid
worry,butthroughherinterpersonalstyle.That disappointmentwhenthefightinginevitablyre-
is, she adopted a caretaking role in relation to commenced.Asanadult,Peterhasexperienced
her mother, constantly monitoring, checking in problemsinhisownmarriage,ashiswifefinds
aboutbloodsugar,andstrivingtoanticipateher his negativity, worry, and interpersonal style
mother’s needs. This behavior was intermit- problematic. Peter’s wife complains that he
tently negatively reinforced: Sue believed it to doesn’tknowhowtoenjoytheirrelationshipor
avert some of her mother’s blood sugar fluctu- life in general anymore.
ation and moodiness, thereby avoiding some Like Sue, Peter developed a heightened sen-
emotional contrasts. sitivitytoshiftsfromneutralorpositivemoods
With her current boyfriend, Sue admits to into the sadness and anxiety that would follow
beingtoomuch“inhisbusiness”andattention- hisparents’arguments.PerhapsforPeter,main-
seeking, a pattern not unique to this relation- taining chronic negative arousal was the only
ship. It is likely that she continues to employ way he could feel in control, rather than be
problematic interpersonal behaviors such as buffeted about by emotions that shifted drasti-
overly maternal caretaking to avoid emotional cally from happiness to dread. Peter has de-
contrasts. This interpersonal motive keeps her scribedfeelingthatitisunwisenottoexpectthe
vigilant to potential shifts in her boyfriend’s worst outcome, and that although he might
mood,ratherthansimplyenjoyinggenuinevul- worry too much, “it’s a lot better than getting
nerabilityandwarmth.Moreover,herboyfriend yanked around.” Peter complains that his wife
sometimesviewsherattentivenessasmotivated “always wants me to wear rose-colored glasses
by self-protection rather than genuine care, and look on the bright side,” but that this feels
which he finds irritating. foolishtohim.Herecentlystatedthatheprefers
.srehsilbupdeillastifoenoronoitaicossAlacigolohcysPnaciremAehtybdethgirypocsitnemucodsihT
.yldaorbdetanimessidebottonsidnaresulaudividniehtfoesulanosrepehtrofylelosdednetnisielcitrasihT
.devreser
era
,seigolonhcet
ralimis
dna
,gniniart
IA
,gninim
atad
dna
txet
rof
gnidulcni
,sthgir
llA
162 NEWMAN,LLERA,ERICKSON,ANDPRZEWORSKI
dreary weather over sunny days because “at behaviorthatdoesnotaddresstheseunderlying
leastwithrainydaysyouknowwhattoexpect; emotional difficulties may be unsuccessful.
withsunnydaysyouneverknowhowlonguntil
therainisgonnacomeandsnatchawayanyjoy
Treatment Implications
you might be having.”
In contrast to Sue’s warm or intrusive style,
Fromatreatmentperspective,itmaybenec-
Peterlearnedcoldandsubmissiveinterpersonal
essary to teach individuals with GAD how to
styles to regulate his own emotion and avoid
manage their strong emotional reactions
emotional contrasts. As an adolescent, Peter
through means other than worrying. For exam-
learnedtorespondtohisparentsbyengagingin
ple,therapistscouldfocusonteachingstrategies cold(e.g.,distancinghimselffromfamilygath-
thatinvolvelettinggoofcontroloveremotions, erings, asking little from parents) and submis-
and learning to accept and tolerate emotional sive strategies (e.g., going along with parental
vulnerability.Itmayalsobehelpfultodesensi-
requests, not expressing his own needs). These
tizethemtotheirphobicreactionbyconducting
strategies were intermittently negatively rein-
graded exposure to negative contrasts through
forced,asstrivingnottobenoticedandappeas-
inducing a relaxed state through progressive
inghisparentssometimespreventedthemfrom
muscle relaxation, diaphragmatic breathing, or
arguing about how to parent him. In his own
pleasant imagery and then imagining feared
marriage, Peter’s wife complains that he tends
outcomes. During exposure, clients’ attention
toengageinisolatingandappeasingbehaviors,
should be drawn to the internal experience of
asking little of her and rarely expressing him-
contrastfromapositivestatetoanegativestate.
self. At first, she admired his “strong, silent”
Thegoalofthisistoexposetheindividualnottothe nature and enjoyed being the one to select dat-
ing activities; however, she now feels upset by feared outcome but to the internal sensations that
his passivity, and Peter ironically has become accompanythe contrast between neutral/relaxed
more submissive as if to prevent her from ex- and negative states. This can be accomplished
pressing frustration. Like Sue, Peter’s interper- in a graded manner by creating a hierarchy
sonal strategies backfire; in fact, by attempting based on strength of the contrast that an indi-
to avoid emotional contrasts, Sue and Peter’s vidual would experience if various situations
behaviorlikelyservestoincreasetheirsensitiv- were to occur.
ity to and fear of such contrasts. Forexample,Peter’stherapistcollaboratively
It is interesting that Sue and Peter present helpedhimexaminetheprosandconsofworry
similar GAD diagnosis, but divergent interper- asawaytoavoidcontrasts,validatinghissense
sonalhistoriesandproblems,yettheircommon thatmaintaininganegativemoodisonewayto
sensitivity to emotional contrasts may clarify avoid such contrasts, but also giving him op-
conceptualization. portunitiestoarticulatehowthischoicehasthe
consequenceofsignificantlyimpairinghisqual-
Using the Contrast Avoidance Model as a ityoflife.Amoreadaptivemeanstocopewith
Therapeutic Framework hisemotionswouldbetoletgoofanyeffortto
control them. She introduced the metaphor of
As we see with Sue and Peter, clients with emotions feeling like waves and said that for
GAD may actually prefer to be worried and some individuals, emotions feel like stormy
anxious the majority of the time rather than seas. Peter gradually become open to the idea
allowthemselvestofeelhappy,becauseitfeels that he could learn how to allow himself to let
betterthanexperiencingthatmomentwhenany go of his negative/defensive stance and to ride
happiness they have tried to cultivate is shat- out the waves of his emotions.
tered. As such, it may be difficult for clients to Therefore,sheandPeteridentifiedsituationsthat
let go of worry as a defensive emotional strat- often led to shifts in his emotions, such as an
egy.Inaddition,whenthefearedeventdoesnot argument with his wife, thinking about his par-
happen(whichisthemostlikelyoutcome),peo- ents’ marital conflict, interactions with his par-
ple experience relief, which negatively rein- ents, and difficulties at work. Using a 0–10
forces their chronic worry. Therefore, we pro- scale,Peterratedtheintensityofaffectiveshifts
pose that treatment aimed at reducing worry that he experienced during each of these situa-
.srehsilbupdeillastifoenoronoitaicossAlacigolohcysPnaciremAehtybdethgirypocsitnemucodsihT
.yldaorbdetanimessidebottonsidnaresulaudividniehtfoesulanosrepehtrofylelosdednetnisielcitrasihT
.devreser
era
,seigolonhcet
ralimis
dna
,gniniart
IA
,gninim
atad
dna
txet
rof
gnidulcni
,sthgir
llA
CONTRASTAVOIDANCEMODELINGAD 163
tions and created a hierarchy of situations with tional impact it would have on her, such as her
affective contrasts. Then his therapist guided anxietythathecouldturnhisfrustrationtoward
him through initial relaxation followed by ima- her.Next,Sueimaginedherselfallowinghimto
ginal exposure to these situations. During each experience his negative mood without immedi-
exposure, his therapist would ask him to de- ately taking on a mothering role (immediately
scribe the situation in vivid detail in order to soothing him to prevent him from expressing
evoke a strong affective response. When Peter further negativity toward her). Aside from in-
experienced this shift from a relaxed to a neg- session imaginal exposure, Sue was also en-
ative state, she would have him focus on his couraged to practice tolerating interpersonal
physiological and affective experience in order negativity in real-life situations with her boy-
to fully expose him to the experience of negative friend.
contrast. For homework, Peter practiced these It is likely that Sue and Peter’s interpersonal
imaginal emotional contrast-based situations behaviorshavebecomesohabitualthattheydo
until he habituated to the affective contrast. As not realize their function as a means to avoid
he experienced less sensitivity to contrasts in emotional contrasts. Therefore, therapy should
these exposures, he increasingly became moti- helpSueandPeterbecomemoreawareoftheir
vated to let go of the need to anticipate such patterns and attend to the negative relationship
contrasts.Overtime,Peterreportedthathestill consequences (pros and cons) of interpersonal
experiencedwavesofemotionsbutnowfeltthat regulation of emotional contrasts, as well as
hecouldactuallyenjoymostofhislifeandthat learning alternative, underutilized social strate-
he could simply ride out the wave without it giestobroadentheirrepertoire.IfSuecanmore
feeling so uncomfortable. fullygrasphowherwarmbutintrusivebehavior
In terms of interpersonal factors, we suspect comes across as self-serving and makes her
that the reason why Interpersonal and Emo- boyfriendfeelcontrolled,thebehaviormayap-
tional Processing Therapy for GAD was not pear less desirable; she might therefore benefit
optimally efficacious (Newman et al., 2011) is from learning “opposite” skills such as attend-
notbecauseofitsmethods(e.g.,exposure,skills ing to her own needs and respecting his auton-
training,etc.),butratherbecausesuchstrategies omy. Analogously, if Peter can learn that his
may need to explicitly target clients’ interper- cold-submissivebehaviorismorelikelytoelicit
sonal means of avoiding emotional contrasts. irritability from his wife than to circumvent it,
For example, in addition to affective exposure he may be more open to learning alternative
topics, both Sue and Peter may benefit from interpersonalwarm-dominantskillssuchasdis-
interpersonal exposures relevant to currently closing emotionally to his wife and making
avoided interpersonal fears (e.g., imagining an directrequests.Therapistsshouldinsurethatno
interaction in which someone is angry with interpersonal skills practiced are adopted as
them). Thus, treatment would include learning “safety behaviors” or ways to avoid emotional
to be experientially present and vulnerable to contrasts.
possible emotional contrasts with significant
others, allowing oneself to simply enjoy the Suggestions for Future Research
interaction, while blocking use of avoidant in-
terpersonal strategies (i.e., cold-submission for Given the relative newness of the Contrast
Peter, intrusiveness for Sue), akin to exposure Avoidancemodel,aswellastherebeingonlya
with ritual prevention for obsessive–compul- few direct tests of it thus far, the potential for
sivedisorder(OCD).Exposuresshouldbechar- future research is quite vast. For example, the
acterized by high specificity, present-focused, development of a reliable and valid measure-
andideographic,within-sessionaffectchanges. ment tool to assess contrast avoidance as a
For example, Sue and her therapist came up generaltendency,aswellassituationalcontrast
with a series of exposures to address her inter- avoidance,wouldbeimportant.Suchameasure
personal fears. For instance, subsequent to en- could also test various components of the Con-
gaging in relaxation techniques, Sue was asked trast Avoidance model separately. Components
to imagine her boyfriend coming home from to be tested would include discomfort with a
work in a negative mood. This imaginal expo- negative emotional contrast, active effort to
sure included an emphasis on the feared emo- avoid a negative emotional contrast, specific
.srehsilbupdeillastifoenoronoitaicossAlacigolohcysPnaciremAehtybdethgirypocsitnemucodsihT
.yldaorbdetanimessidebottonsidnaresulaudividniehtfoesulanosrepehtrofylelosdednetnisielcitrasihT
.devreser
era
,seigolonhcet
ralimis
dna
,gniniart
IA
,gninim
atad
dna
txet
rof
gnidulcni
,sthgir
llA
164 NEWMAN,LLERA,ERICKSON,ANDPRZEWORSKI
use of worry to avoid a negative emotional Conclusion/Take Home Messages
contrast, worry creating and prolonging neg-
X Generalizedanxietydisorderisachronicanddebili-
ativeemotions,preferenceforanegativestate
tating affliction and current treatments do not work for
to increase the probability of a positive emo- everybody.
tional contrast, and positive emotions leading X Anewmodelproposesthatworry,thecentralfeature
to discomfort or sense of vulnerability; Llera ofGAD,isusedasameanstocreateandsustainnegative
emotioninanefforttoavoidasharpincreaseinnegative
and Newman are in the process of creating
emotion.
suchameasure.Itwouldalsobeinterestingto X Much research on neurobiology, physiology, and
develop a means to assess individual differ- self-reportprovidesevidenceconsistentwiththismodel.
X Contrast avoidance may also be enacted interper-
ences in using interpersonal strategies to
sonallyinwaysthataremaladaptivetohealthyrelation-
avoid emotional contrasts.
ships. Potential etiological factors that may put an indi-
Another avenue of future studies would be vidual at risk for the development of an aversion to an
to examine whether the Contrast Avoidance emotionalcontrastincludegenetics,neurobiology,emo-
tionalreactivity,negativelifeevents,trauma,attachment
model is specific to individuals with GAD.
andparentingstyle.
Forexample,itispossiblethatthepreference X TreatmentsforGADmightbeimprovedbyinclud-
foranegativeemotionalstatetoguardagainst ing techniques that help individuals become aware of
asuddenemotionalshiftmayalsobefoundin theircontrastavoidancepatterns.
X Once patterns are identified, future treatments
individuals diagnosed with major depression.
shouldimplementexposuretoanegativeemotionalcon-
It might further be possible that depressed trastwithoutworryingandexposuretointerpersonalin-
individuals do not necessarily use worry to teractionsusingmorevulnerableapproachstyles.
X Futureresearchshoulddevelopvalidatedmeasures
prevent a negative emotional contrast but use
for contrast avoidance, examine its specificity to GAD,
other strategies to maintain a negative emo- and test possible etiological, maintaining factors and
tionalstate(e.g.,rumination).Futureresearch treatmentsforcontrastavoidance.
might also test whether the model applies to
other anxiety disorders than GAD such as References
social anxiety disorder, posttraumatic stress
Alonso,J.,Petukhova,M.,Vilagut,G.,Chatterji,S.,
disorder, or panic disorder.
Heeringa, S., Ustun, T. B., . . . Kessler, R. C.
Additional research could examine the eti-
(2011).Daysoutofroleduetocommonphysical
ology of negative contrast avoidance. Vari- and mental conditions: Results from the WHO
ables such as trauma history, preference for World Mental Health surveys. Molecular Psychi-
negative reinforcement over positive rein- atry,16,1234–1246.doi:10.1038/mp.2010.101
forcement, and attachment could be investi- Ansell, E. B., Pinto, A., Edelen, M. O., Markowitz,
J. C., Sanislow, C. A., Yen, S., . . . Grilo, C. M.
gated. Similarly, it would be helpful to iden-
(2011). The association of personality disorders
tify whether sensitivity to an emotional
withtheprospective7-yearcourseofanxietydis-
contrastanduseofworryand/orinterpersonal
orders. Psychological Medicine, 41, 1019–1028.
strategies to control it prospectively predicts doi:10.1017/S0033291710001777
thedevelopmentofGAD.Additionalresearch Barger, S. D., & Sydeman, S. J. (2005). Does gen-
might examine whether neuroticism is a gen- eralized anxiety disorder predict coronary heart
eralvulnerabilityacrossallanxietyandmood diseaseriskfactorsindependentlyofmajordepres-
sive disorder? Journal of Affective Disorders, 88,
disordersbutspecificlearningexperiencesas-
87–91.doi:10.1016/j.jad.2005.05.012
sociated with contrast avoidance lead to the
Beesdo,K.,Pine,D.S.,Lieb,R.,&Wittchen,H.U.
development of GAD.
(2010).Incidenceandriskpatternsofanxietyand
There is also a strong need to develop fur- depressive disorders and categorization of gener-
ther and test the treatment strategies de- alized anxiety disorder. Archives of General Psy-
scribed here. Such treatment should be com- chiatry,67,47–57.doi:10.1001/archgenpsychiatry
pared to standard CBT on individual .2009.177
Borkovec, T. D., & Hu, S. (1990). The effect of
differences in contrast avoidance and on its
worryoncardiovascularresponsetophobicimag-
ability to reduce GAD symptoms. It would
ery.BehaviourResearchandTherapy,28,69–73.
also be warranted to examine reduction of
doi:10.1016/0005-7967(90)90056-O
contrast avoidance as the mechanism of Borkovec, T. D., Newman, M. G., Pincus, A. L., &
change in GAD symptoms. Lytle, R. (2002). A component analysis of cogni-
.srehsilbupdeillastifoenoronoitaicossAlacigolohcysPnaciremAehtybdethgirypocsitnemucodsihT
.yldaorbdetanimessidebottonsidnaresulaudividniehtfoesulanosrepehtrofylelosdednetnisielcitrasihT
.devreser
era
,seigolonhcet
ralimis
dna
,gniniart
IA
,gninim
atad
dna
txet
rof
gnidulcni
,sthgir
llA
CONTRASTAVOIDANCEMODELINGAD 165
tive-behavioral therapy for generalized anxiety exemplar. Assessment, 12, 243–254. doi:10.1177/
disorder and the role of interpersonal problems. 1073191105276653
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, Heim,C.,Newport,J.,Heit,S.,Graham,Y.P.,Wil-
70,288–298.doi:10.1037/0022-006X.70.2.288 cox,M.,Bonsall,R.,...Nemeroff,C.B.(2000).
Bowlby,J.(1973).Attachmentandloss:Vol.2.Sep- Pituitary-adrenal and autonomic responses to
aration.NewYork,NY:BasicBooks. stressinwomenaftersexualandphysicalabusein
Brown,A.M.,&Whiteside,S.P.(2008).Relations childhood.JournaloftheAmericanMedicalAsso-
among perceived parental rearing behaviors, at- ciation, 284, 592–597. doi:10.1001/jama.284.5
tachment style, and worry in anxious children. .592
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 22, 263–272. doi: Hettema,J.M.,Kettenmann,B.,Ahluwalia,V.,Mc-
10.1016/j.janxdis.2007.02.002 Carthy, C., Kates, W. R., Schmitt, J. E., . . .
Bruce, S. E., Yonkers, K. A., Otto, M. W., Eisen, Fatouros, P. (2012). Pilot multimodal twin imag-
J. L., Weisberg, R. B., Pagano, M., . . . Keller, ingstudyofgeneralizedanxietydisorder.Depres-
M.B.(2005).Influenceofpsychiatriccomorbidity sion and Anxiety, 29, 202–209. doi:10.1002/da
onrecoveryandrecurrenceingeneralizedanxiety .20901
disorder,socialphobia,andpanicdisorder:A12- Hettema,J.M.,Neale,M.C.,Myers,J.M.,Prescott,
year prospective study. The American Journal of C. A., & Kendler, K. S. (2006). A population-
Psychiatry,162,1179–1187.doi:10.1176/appi.ajp basedtwinstudyoftherelationshipbetweenneu-
.162.6.1179 roticismandinternalizingdisorders.TheAmerican
Cassidy, J., Lichtenstein-Phelps, J., Sibrava, N. J., JournalofPsychiatry,163,857–864.doi:10.1176/
Thomas,C.L.,&Borkovec,T.D.(2009).Gener- appi.ajp.163.5.857
alized anxiety disorder: Connections with self- Hoehn-Saric, R., Hazlett, R. L., & McLeod, D. R.
reportedattachment.BehaviorTherapy,40,23–38. (1993). Generalized anxiety disorder with early
doi:10.1016/j.beth.2007.12.004 and late onset of anxiety symptoms. Comprehen-
Centers for Disease Control. (1988). Health status sive Psychiatry, 34, 291–298. doi:10.1016/0010-
of vietnam veterans: I. Psychosocial character- 440X(93)90013-T
istics. Journal of the American Medical Associ- Kagan, J., & Snidman, N. (1999). Early childhood
ation, 259, 2701–2707. doi:10.1001/jama.1988 predictors of adult anxiety disorders. Biological
.03720180027028 Psychiatry, 46, 1536–1541. doi:10.1016/S0006-
Crits-Christoph,P.,Gibbons,M.B.C.,Narducci,J., 3223(99)00137-7
Schamberger, M., & Gallop, R. (2005). Interper- Kendler, K. S., Hettema, J. M., Butera, F., Gardner,
sonalproblemsandtheoutcomeofinterpersonally C.O.,&Prescott,C.A.(2003).Lifeeventdimen-
oriented psychodynamic treatment of GAD. Psy- sionsofloss,humiliation,entrapment,anddanger
chotherapy:Theory,Research,Practice,Training, inthepredictionofonsetsofmajordepressionand
42,211–224.doi:10.1037/0033-3204.42.2.211 generalizedanxiety.ArchivesofGeneralPsychia-
Dyck,I.R.,Phillips,K.A.,Warshaw,M.G.,Dolan, try,60,789–796.doi:10.1001/archpsyc.60.8.789
R.T.,Shea,M.T.,Stout,R.L.,...Keller,M.B. Kessler,R.C.,Berglund,P.A.,Dewit,D.J.,Ustun,
(2001). Patterns of personality pathology in pa- T. B., Wang, P. S., & Wittchen, H. U. (2002).
tientswithgeneralizedanxietydisorder,panicdis- Distinguishing generalized anxiety disorder from
order with and without agoraphobia, and social major depression: Prevalence and impairment
phobia.JournalofPersonalityDisorders,15,60– from current pure and comorbid disorders in the
71.doi:10.1521/pedi.15.1.60.18643 USandOntario.InternationalJournalofMethods
Erickson, T. M., Newman, M. G., & Abelson, J. L. inPsychiatricResearch,11,99–111.doi:10.1002/
(2010,November).Discrepantperspectivesonthe mpr.128
interpersonal characteristics of worriers based Kessler, R. C., Greenberg, P. E., Mickelson, K. D.,
upon self vs. peer assessment. Paper presented at Meneades, L. M., & Wang, P. S. (2001). The
the44thAnnualConventionoftheAssociationfor effectsofchronicmedicalconditionsonworkloss
the Advancement of Behavioral and Cognitive and work cutback. Journal of Occupational and
Therapies,SanFrancisco,CA. Environmental Medicine, 43, 218–225. doi:
Erickson,T.M.,&Newman,M.G.(2007).Interper- 10.1097/00043764-200103000-00009
sonalandemotionalprocessesingeneralizedanx- Lee, S., Guo, W. J., Tsang, A., He, Y. L., Huang,
iety disorder analogues during social interaction Y. Q., Liu, Z. R., . . . Kessler, R. C. (2009).
tasks. Behavior Therapy, 38, 364–377. doi: Impaired role functioning and treatment rates for
10.1016/j.beth.2006.10.005 mentaldisordersandchronicphysicaldisordersin
Erickson, T. M., & Pincus, A. L. (2005). Using metropolitan China. Psychosomatic Medicine, 71,
Structural Analysis of Social Behavior (SASB) 886–893.doi:10.1097/PSY.0b013e3181baa65e
measures of self- and social perception to give Llera, S. J., & Newman, M. G. (2010). Effects of
interpersonalmeaningtosymptoms:Anxietyasan worryonphysiologicalandsubjectivereactivityto
.srehsilbupdeillastifoenoronoitaicossAlacigolohcysPnaciremAehtybdethgirypocsitnemucodsihT
.yldaorbdetanimessidebottonsidnaresulaudividniehtfoesulanosrepehtrofylelosdednetnisielcitrasihT
.devreser
era
,seigolonhcet
ralimis
dna
,gniniart
IA
,gninim
atad
dna
txet
rof
gnidulcni
,sthgir
llA
166 NEWMAN,LLERA,ERICKSON,ANDPRZEWORSKI
emotional stimuli in generalized anxiety disorder Newman,M.G.,Castonguay,L.G.,Borkovec,T.D.,
andnonanxiouscontrolparticipants.Emotion,10, & Molnar, C. (2004). Integrative psychotherapy.
640–650.doi:10.1037/a0019351 In R. G. Heimberg, C. L. Turk,& D. S. Mennin
Llera, S. J., & Newman, M. G. (2014). Rethinking (Eds.),Generalizedanxietydisorder:Advancesin
the role of worry in generalized anxiety disorder: research and practice (pp. 320–350). New York,
Evidence supporting a model of Emotional Con- NY:GuilfordPress.
trast Avoidance. Behavior Therapy, 45, 283–299. Newman, M. G., & Erickson, T. M. (2010). Gener-
doi:10.1016/j.beth.2013.12.011 alizedanxietydisorder.InJ.G.Beck(Ed.),Inter-
Martens, E. J., de Jonge, P., Na, B., Cohen, B. E., personalprocessesintheanxietydisorders:Impli-
Lett, H., & Whooley, M. A. (2010). Scared to cations for understanding psychopathology and
death? Generalized anxiety disorder and cardio- treatment(pp.235–259).Washington,DC:Amer-
vascular events in patients with stable coronary ican Psychological Association. doi:10.1037/
heartdisease:TheHeartandSoulStudy.Archives 12084-009
ofGeneralPsychiatry,67,750–758.doi:10.1001/ Newman, M. G., & Llera, S. J. (2011). A novel
archgenpsychiatry.2010.74 theory of experiential avoidance in generalized
Mennin, D. S., Heimberg, R. G., Turk, C. L., & anxiety disorder: A review and synthesis of re-
Fresco,D.M.(2005).Preliminaryevidenceforan searchsupportingaContrastAvoidanceModelof
worry. Clinical Psychology Review, 31, 371–382. emotiondysregulationmodelofgeneralizedanxi-
doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2011.01.008
etydisorder.BehaviourResearchandTherapy,43,
Newman,M.G.,Llera,S.J.,Erickson,T.M.,Prze-
1281–1310.doi:10.1016/j.brat.2004.08.008
worski, A., & Castonguay, L. G. (2013). Worry
Mickelson, K. D., Kessler, R. C., & Shaver, P. R.
and generalized anxiety disorder: A review and
(1997).Adultattachmentinanationallyrepresen-
theoretical synthesis of research on nature, etiol-
tative sample. Journal of Personality and Social
ogy, and treatment. Annual Review of Clinical
Psychology, 73, 1092–1106. doi:10.1037/0022-
Psychology, 9, 275–297. doi:10.1146/annurev-
3514.73.5.1092
clinpsy-050212-185544 Moffitt,T.E.,Caspi,A.,Harrington,H.,Milne,B.J.,
Newman, M. G., Przeworski, A., Fisher, A. J., &
Melchior,M.,Goldberg,D.,&Poulton,R.(2007).
Borkovec,T.D.(2010).Diagnosticcomorbidityin
Generalized anxiety disorder and depression:
adultswithgeneralizedanxietydisorder:Impactof
Childhoodriskfactorsinabirthcohortfollowedto
comorbidity on psychotherapy outcome and im-
age32.PsychologicalMedicine,37,441–452.doi:
pactofpsychotherapyoncomorbiddiagnoses.Be-
10.1017/S0033291706009640
havior Therapy, 41, 59–72. doi:10.1016/j.beth
Moffitt, T. E., Caspi, A., Taylor, A., Kokaua, J., .2008.12.005
Milne,B.J.,Polanczyk,G.,&Poulton,R.(2010).
Nitschke,J.B.,Sarinopoulos,I.,Oathes,D.J.,John-
Howcommonarecommonmentaldisorders?Ev-
stone,T.,Whalen,P.J.,Davidson,R.J.,&Kalin,
idence that lifetime prevalence rates are doubled
N. H. (2009). Anticipatory activation in the
byprospectiveversusretrospectiveascertainment.
amygdala and anterior cingulate in generalized
Psychological Medicine, 40, 899–909. doi:
anxiety disorder and prediction of treatment re-
10.1017/S0033291709991036
sponse. American Journal of Psychiatry, 166,
Mogg,K.,Millar,N.,&Bradley,B.P.(2000).Biases
302–310.doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2008.07101682
ineyemovementstothreateningfacialexpressions
Nordahl, H. M., Wells, A., Olsson, C. A., & Bjerk-
ingeneralizedanxietydisorderanddepressivedis- eset, O. (2010). Association between abnormal
order.JournalofAbnormalPsychology,109,695– psychosocial situations in childhood, generalized
704.doi:10.1037/0021-843X.109.4.695 anxietydisorderandoppositionaldefiantdisorder.
Muris, P., Meesters, C., van Melick, M., & Zwam- Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychia-
bag, L. (2001). Self-reported attachment style, at- try, 44, 852–858. doi:10.3109/00048674.2010
tachment quality, and symptoms of anxiety and .489504
depression in young adolescents. Personality and Pruneti,C.A.,Lento,R.M.,Fante,C.,Carrozzo,E.,
IndividualDifferences,30,809–818.doi:10.1016/ &Fontana,F.(2010).Autonomicarousalanddif-
S0191-8869(00)00074-X ferentialdiagnosisinclinicalpsychologyandpsy-
Newman,M.G.,Castonguay,L.G.,Borkovec,T.D., chopathology.ItalianJournalofPsychopathology,
Fisher,A.J.,Boswell,J.,Szkodny,L.E.,&Nor- 16,43–52.
dberg,S.S.(2011).Arandomizedcontrolledtrial Przeworski,A.,Newman,M.G.,Pincus,A.L.,Ka-
of cognitive-behavioral therapy for generalized soff,M.B.,Yamasaki,A.S.,Castonguay,L.G.,&
anxiety disorder with integrated techniques from Berlin, K. S. (2011). Interpersonal pathoplasticity
emotion-focusedandinterpersonaltherapies.Jour- in individuals with generalized anxiety disorder.
nal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 79, Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 120, 286–298.
171–181.doi:10.1037/a0022489 doi:10.1037/a0023334
.srehsilbupdeillastifoenoronoitaicossAlacigolohcysPnaciremAehtybdethgirypocsitnemucodsihT
.yldaorbdetanimessidebottonsidnaresulaudividniehtfoesulanosrepehtrofylelosdednetnisielcitrasihT
.devreser
era
,seigolonhcet
ralimis
dna
,gniniart
IA
,gninim
atad
dna
txet
rof
gnidulcni
,sthgir
llA
CONTRASTAVOIDANCEMODELINGAD 167
Radstaak, M., Geurts, S. A., Brosschot, J. F., Cil- viewoftheliterature.JournalofAnxietyDisorders,
lessen,A.H.,&Kompier,M.A.(2011).Therole 1,69–86.doi:10.1016/0887-6185(87)90024-7
of affect and rumination in cardiovascular recov- Todaro, J. F., Shen, B. J., Raffa, S. D., Tilkemeier,
ery from stress. International Journal of Psycho- P. L., & Niaura, R. (2007). Prevalence of anxiety
physiology, 81, 237–244. doi:10.1016/j.ijpsycho disordersinmenandwomenwithestablishedcor-
.2011.06.017 onary heart disease. Journal of Cardiopulmonary
Roemer, L., Molina, S., & Borkovec, T. D. (1997). Rehabilitation and Prevention, 27, 86–91. doi:
Aninvestigationofworrycontentamonggenerally 10.1097/01.HCR.0000265036.24157.e7
anxious individuals. Journal of Nervous and Turk,C.L.,Heimberg,R.G.,Luterek,J.A.,Mennin,
Mental Disease, 185, 314–319. doi:10.1097/ D.S.,&Fresco,D.M.(2005).Emotiondysregu-
00005053-199705000-00005 lation in generalized anxiety disorder: A compar-
Rothbart,M.K.(2007).Temperament,development, isonwithsocialanxietydisorder.CognitiveTher-
andpersonality.CurrentDirectionsinPsycholog- apy and Research, 5, 89–106. doi:10.1007/
ical Science, 16, 207–212. doi:10.1111/j.1467- s10608-005-1651-1
Whisman, M. A. (2007). Marital distress and
8721.2007.00505.x
DSM–IV psychiatric disorders in a population-
Safren, S. A., Gershuny, B. S., Marzol, P., Otto,
based national survey. Journal of Abnormal Psy-
M.W.,&Pollack,M.H.(2002).Historyofchild-
chology, 116, 638–643. doi:10.1037/0021-843X hood abuse in panic disorder, social phobia, and
.116.3.638
generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of Nervous
Whisman, M. A., Sheldon, C. T., & Goering, P.
and Mental Disease, 190, 453–456. doi:10.1097/
(2000). Psychiatric disorders and dissatisfaction
00005053-200207000-00005
withsocialrelationships:Doestypeofrelationship
Sanderson, K., & Andrews, G. (2002). Prevalence
matter? Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109,
andseverityofmentalhealth-relateddisabilityand
803–808.doi:10.1037/0021-843X.109.4.803
relationshiptodiagnosis.PsychiatricServices,53,
Wijsbroek, S. A. M., Hale Iii, W. W., Raaijmakers,
80–86.doi:10.1176/appi.ps.53.1.80
Q.A.W.,&Meeus,W.H.J.(2011).Thedirection
Schienle,A.,Ebner,F.,&Schäfer,A.(2011).Local-
of effects between perceived parental behavioral
izedgraymattervolumeabnormalitiesingeneral-
controlandpsychologicalcontrolandadolescents’
ized anxiety disorder. European Archives of Psy-
self-reportedGADandSADsymptoms.European
chiatryandClinicalNeuroscience,261,303–307.
Child&AdolescentPsychiatry,20,361–371.doi:
doi:10.1007/s00406-010-0147-5
10.1007/s00787-011-0183-3
Schienle,A.,Hettema,J.M.,Cáceda,R.,&Nemer-
Yassa,M.A.,Hazlett,R.L.,Stark,C.E.,&Hoehn-
off, C. B. (2011). Neurobiology and genetics of Saric,R.(2012).FunctionalMRIoftheamygdala
generalized anxiety disorder. Psychiatric Annals, andbednucleusofthestriaterminalisduringcon-
41,113–123.doi:10.3928/00485713-20110203-10 ditionsofuncertaintyingeneralizedanxietydisor-
Shanahan, L., Copeland, W., Costello, E. J., & An- der. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 46, 1045–
gold, A. (2008). Specificity of putative psychoso- 1052.doi:10.1016/j.jpsychires.2012.04.013
cial risk factors for psychiatric disorders in chil- Zinbarg, R. E., Lee, J. E., & Yoon, K. L. (2007).
drenandadolescents.JournalofChildPsychology Dyadic predictors of outcome in a cognitive-
and Psychiatry, 49, 34–42. doi:10.1111/j.1469- behavioral program for patients with generalized
7610.2007.01822.x anxiety disorder in committed relationships: A
Shore,J.H.,Tatum,E.L.,&Vollmer,W.M.(1986). “spoonful of sugar” and a dose of non-hostile
Psychiatric reactions to disaster: The Mount St. criticismmayhelp.BehaviourResearchandTher-
Helens experience. American Journal of Psychia- apy,45,699–713.doi:10.1016/j.brat.2006.06.005
try,143,590–595.
Steketee,G.,&Foa,E.B.(1987).Rape victims: Post- ReceivedFebruary14,2014
traumaticstressresponsesandtheirtreatment:Are- AcceptedFebruary19,2014 (cid:2)
.srehsilbupdeillastifoenoronoitaicossAlacigolohcysPnaciremAehtybdethgirypocsitnemucodsihT
.yldaorbdetanimessidebottonsidnaresulaudividniehtfoesulanosrepehtrofylelosdednetnisielcitrasihT
.devreser
era
,seigolonhcet
ralimis
dna
,gniniart
IA
,gninim
atad
dna
txet
rof
gnidulcni
,sthgir
llA
